# 15

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT WHAT GOES ON

## (_Sessions 42–44_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What verb, ending in -_ate_, means:

• _to exhaust?_

• _to scold severely?_

• _to deny oneself?_

• _to repeat the main points?_

• _to be a victim of mental or intellectual stagnation?_

• _to pretend?_

• _to hint?_

• _to make_ (_something_) _easier to bear?_

• _to show sympathy?_

• _to waver indecisively?_

***

### SESSION 42 <a href="#page452" id="page452"></a>

WORDS are symbols of ideas—and we have been learning, discussing, and working with words as they revolve around certain basic concepts.

Starting with an idea (personality types, doctors, occupations, science, lying, actions, speech, insults, compliments, etc.), we have explored the meanings and uses of ten basic words; then, working from each word, we have wandered off toward any ideas and additional words that a basic word might suggest, or toward any _other_ words built on the same Latin or Greek roots.

By this natural and logical method, you have been able to make meaningful and lasting contact with fifty to a hundred or more words in each chapter. And you have discovered, I think, that while five _isolated_ words may be difficult to learn in one day, fifty to a hundred or more _related_ words are easy to learn in a few sessions.

In this session we learn words that tell what’s going on, what’s happening, what people do to each other or to themselves, or what others do to _them._

#### IDEAS

**1. complete exhaustion**

You have stayed up all night. And what were you doing? Playing poker, a very pleasant way of whiling away time? No. Engaging in some creative activity, like writing a short story, planning a political campaign, discussing fascinating questions with friends? No.

The examples I have offered are exciting or stimulating—as psychologists have discovered, it is not work or effort that causes fatigue, but boredom, frustration, or a similar feeling.

You have stayed up all night with a very sick husband, wife, child, or dear friend. And despite all your ministrations, the patient is sinking. You can see how this long vigil contains all the elements of frustration that contribute to mental, physical, and nervous fatigue.

And so you are bushed—but completely bushed. Your exhaustion is mental, it is physiological, it is emotional.

What verb expresses the effect of the night’s frustrations on you?

_to enervate_

**2. tongue-lashing**

You suddenly see the flashing red light as you glance in your rear-view mirror. It’s the middle of the night, yet the police flasher is clear as day—and then you hear the low growl of the siren. So you pull over, knowing you were speeding along at 70 on the 55-mile-an-hour-limit freeway—after all, there was not another car in sight on the deserted stretch of road you were traveling.

The cop is pleasant, courteous, smiling; merely asks for your driver’s license and registration; even says “Please.”

Feeling guilty and stupid, you become irritated. So what do you do?

You lash out at the officer with all the verbal vituperation welling up in you from your self-anger. You scold him harshly for not spending his time looking for violent criminals instead of harassing innocent motorists; you call into question his honesty, his ambition, his fairness, even his ancestry. To no avail, of course—you stare at the traffic ticket morosely as the police cruiser pulls away.

What verb describes how you reacted?

_to castigate_

**3. altruistic**

Phyllis is selfless and self-sacrificing. Her husband’s needs and desires come first—even when they conflict with her own. Clothes for her two daughters are her main concern—even if she has towear a seven-year-old coat and outmoded dresses so that Paula and Evelyn can look smart and trim. At the dinner table, she heaps everyone’s plate—while she herself often goes without. Phyllis will deny herself, will scrimp and save—all to the end that she may offer her husband and children the luxuries that her low self-esteem does not permit her to give herself.

What verb expresses what Phyllis does?

_to self-abnegate_

**4. repetition**

You have delivered a long, complicated lecture to your class, and now, to make sure that they will remember the important points, you restate the key ideas, the main thoughts. You offer, in short, a kind of brief summary, step by step, omitting all extraneous details.

What verb best describes what you do?

_to recapitulate_

**5. no joie de vivre**

Perhaps you wake up some gloomy Monday morning (why is it that Monday is always the worst day of the week?) and begin to think of the waste of the last five years. Intellectually, there has been no progress—you’ve read scarcely half a dozen books, haven’t made one new, exciting friend, haven’t had a startling or unusual thought. Economically, things are no better—same old debts to meet, same old hundred dollars in the bank, same old job, same old routine of the eight-to-five workdays, the tuna fish or chicken salad sandwich for lunch, the same dreary ride home. What a life! No change, nothing but routine, sameness, monotony—and for what? (By now you’d better get up—this type of thinking never leads anywhere, as you’ve long since learned.)

What verb describes how you think you live?

_to vegetate_

**6. pretense**

Your neighbor, Mrs. Brown, pops in without invitation to tell you of her latest troubles with (a) her therapist, (b) her hairdresser, (c) her husband, (d) her children, and/or (e) her gynecologist.

Since Florence Brown is dull to the point of ennui, and anyway you have a desk piled high with work you were planning to light into, you find it difficult to concentrate on what she is saying. However, you do not wish to offend her by sending her packing, or even by appearing to be uninterested, so you pretend rapt attention, nodding wisely at what you hope are the right places.

What verb describes this feigning of interest?

_to simulate_

**7. slight hint, no more**

You are an author and are discussing with your editor the possible avenues of publicity and advertising for your new book. At one point in the conversation the editor makes several statements which might—or might not—be construed to mean that the company is going to promote the book heavily. For example, “If we put some real money behind this, we might sell a few copies,” or “I wonder if it would be a good idea to get you on a few talk shows …” No unequivocal commitments, no clear-cut promises, only the slight and oblique mention of possibilities.

What verb expresses what the editor is doing?

_to intimate_

**8. helpful**

Aspirin doesn’t cure any diseases. Yet this popular and inexpensive drug is universally used to lighten and relieve various unpleasant symptoms of disease: aches and pains, fever, inflammations, etc.

What verb expresses the action of aspirin?

_to alleviate_

**9. when the bell tolls**

John Donne’s lines (made famous by Ernest Hemingway):

_No man is an_ Iland, _intire of it selfe; every man is a peece of the_ Continent, _a part of the_ maine; _if a_ Clod _bee washed away by the_ Sea, Europe _is the lesse, as well as if a_ Promontorie _were, as well as if a_ Mannor _of thy_ friends _or of_ thine owne _were; any mans_ death _diminishes_ me, _because I am involved in_ Mankinde; _And therefore never send to know for whom the_ bell _tolls; It tolls for_ thee.

are truer than you may think; any person who views another’s pain with complete detachment or indifference is shutting off important feelings.

When people have suffered a bereavement (as through death); when they have been wounded by life or by friends; then is the time they most need to feel that they are not alone, that you share their misery with them even if you cannot directly alleviate their sorrow. Your sympathy and compassion are, of course, alleviation enough.

What verb signifies this vicarious sharing of sorrow with someone who directly suffers?

_to commiserate_

**10. when two men propose**

Should you marry John or George? (You’re strongly and equally attracted to both.) John is handsome, virile, tender; George is stable, reliable, dependable, always there when you need him. George loves you deeply; John is more exciting. You decide on John, naturally.

But wait—marrying John would mean giving up George, and with George you always know where you stand; he’s like the Rock of Gibraltar (and sometimes almost as dull). So you change your mind—it’s George, on more mature reflection.

But how happy can you be with a husband who is not exciting? Maybe John would be best after all.…

The pendulum swings back and forth—you cannot make up your mind and stick to it. (You fail to realize that your indecision proves that you don’t want to marry either one, or perhaps don’t want to give either one up, or possibly don’t even want to get married.) First it’s John, then it’s George, then back to John, then George again. _Which is it, which is it?_

What verb describes your pendulum-like indecision?

_to vacillate_

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _enervate_      | EN′-Ər-vayt′          |
| -------------------- | --------------------- |
|   2. _castigate_     | KAS′-tƏ-gayt′         |
|   3. _self-abnegate_ | self-AB′-nƏ-gayt′     |
|   4. _recapitulate_  | ree′-kƏ-PICH′-Ə-layt′ |
|   5. _vegetate_      | VEJ′-Ə-tayt′          |
|   6. _simulate_      | SIM′-yƏ-layt′         |
|   7. _intimate_      | IN′-tƏ-mayt′          |
|   8. _alleviate_     | Ə-LEE′-vee-ayt′       |
|   9. _commiserate_   | kƏ-MIZ′-Ə-rayt        |
| 10. _vacillate_      | VAS′-Ə-layt           |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. enervate        | a. deny oneself                      |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------ |
|   2. castigate     | b. stagnate                          |
|   3. self-abnegate | c. suggest; hint                     |
|   4. recapitulate  | d. sympathize                        |
|   5. vegetate      | e. waver                             |
|   6. simulate      | f. exhaust                           |
|   7. intimate      | g. lessen; lighten                   |
|   8. alleviate     | h. summarize                         |
| 9. commiserate     | i. pretend                           |
| 10. vacillate      | j. censure; scold; slash at verbally |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–j, 3–a, 4–h, 5–b, 6–i, 7–c, 8–g, 9–d, 10–e

***

**Do you understand the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. Should you feel _enervated_ after a good night’s sleep?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Do motorists who have been caught speeding sometimes start _castigating_ the traffic officer?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Do people who are completely _self-abnegating_ say “No!” to their needs and desires?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. When you _recapitulate_, do you cover new material?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Do people possessed of _joie de vivre_ usually feel that they are _vegetating?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. When you _simulate_ alertness, do you purposely act somnolent?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. When you _intimate_, do you make a direct statement?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Does aspirin often have an _alleviating_ effect on pain?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Do we naturally _commiserate_ with people who have suffered a bereavement?

YES      NO

10\. Do decisive people often _vacillate?_

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–yes, 3–yes, 4–no, 5–no, 6–no, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–yes, 10–no

***

**Do you understand the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. enervated—exhilarated

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 2\. castigate—praise

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 3\. self-abnegate—deny oneself

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 4\. recapitulate—summarize

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 5\. vegetate—stagnate

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 6\. simulate—pretend

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 7\. intimate—hint

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 8\. alleviate—make worse

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 9\. commiserate—sympathize

SAME      OPPOSITE

10\. vacillate—decide

SAME      OPPOSITE

***

KEY:  1–O, 2–O, 3–S, 4–S, 5–S, 6–S, 7–S, 8–O, 9–S, 10–O

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. pretend

&#x20; 1\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. scold

&#x20; 2\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. sacrifice one’s desires

&#x20; 3\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. waver

&#x20; 4\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. exhaust

&#x20; 5\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. sympathize

&#x20; 6\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. summarize

&#x20; 7\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. lighten

&#x20; 8\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. hint

&#x20; 9\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. stagnate

10\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–simulate, 2–castigate, 3–self-abnegate, 4–vacillate, 5–enervate, 6–commiserate, 7–recapitulate, 8–alleviate, 9–intimate, 10–vegetate

***

(_End of Session 42_)

### SESSION 43 <a href="#page460" id="page460"></a>

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. more than fatigue**

When you are _enervated_, you feel as if your nerves have been ripped out—or so the etymology of the word indicates.

_Enervate_ is derived from _e_- (_ex_-), out, and Latin _nervus_, nerve. _Enervation_ (en′-Ər-VAY′-shƏn) is not just fatigue, but complete devitalization—physical, emotional, mental—as if every ounce of the life force has been sapped out, as if the last particle of energy has been drained away.

Despite its similar appearance to the word _energy, enervation_ is almost a direct antonym. _Energy_ is derived from the Greek prefix _en_-, in, plus the root _ergon_, work; _erg_ is the term used in physics for a unit of work or energy. _Synergism_ (SIN′-Ər-jiz-Əm)—the prefix _syn_-, together or with, plus _ergon_—is the process by which two or more substances or drugs, by working together, produce a greater effect in combination than the sum total of their individual effects.

Alcohol, for example, is a depressant. So are barbiturates and other soporifics. Alcohol and barbiturates work _synergistically_ (sin′-Ər-JIS′-tik′-lee)—the effect of each is increased by the other if the two are taken together.

So if you’re drinking, don’t take a sleeping pill—or if you _must_ take a pill for your insomnia, don’t drink—the combination, if not lethal, will do more to you than you may want done!

_Synergy_ (SIN′-Ər-jee), by the way, is an alternate form of _synergism._

**2. verbal punishment**

_Castigate_ is derived from a Latin verb meaning _to punish;_ in present-day usage, the verb generally refers to verbal punishment,usually harsh and severe. It is somewhat synonymous with _scold, criticize, rebuke, censure, reprimand_, or _berate_, but much stronger than any of these—_rail at, rant at, slash at, lash out at_, or _tongue-lash_ is a much closer synonym. When candidates for office _castigate_ their opponents, they do not mince words.

Can you construct the noun form of _castigate?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**3. saying “No!” to oneself**

_Abnegate_ is derived from Latin _ab_-, away (as in _absent_), plus _nego_, to deny—_self-abnegation_ (ab′-nƏ-GAY′-shƏn), then, is self-denial. _Nego_ itself is a contraction of Latin _neg_-, not, no, and _aio_, I say; to be _self-abnegating_ is to say “No!” to what you want, as if some inner censor were at work whispering, “No, you can’t have that, you can’t do that, you don’t deserve that, you’re not good enough for that.…”

To _negate_ (nƏ-GAYT′) is to deny the truth or existence of, as in “The atheist _negates_ God”; or, by extension, to destroy by working against, as in, “His indulgence in expensive hobbies _negates_ all his wife’s attempts to keep the family solvent.” Can you write the noun form of the verb _negate?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

_Negative_ and _negativity_ obviously spring from the same source as _negate._

**4. heads and headings**

Latin _caput, capitis_ means _head._ The _captain_ is the _head of_ any group; the _capital_ is the “_head_ city” of a state or nation; and to _decapitate_ (dee-KAP′-Ə-tayt′) is to chop off someone’s _head_, a popular activity during the French Revolution after the guillotine was invented. Write the noun form of _decapitate:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Latin _capitulum_ is a little head, or, by extension, the heading, or title, of a chapter. So when you _recapitulate_, you go through the chapter headings again (_re_-), etymologically speaking, or you summarize or review the main points.

Remembering how the noun and adjective forms are derivedfrom _adulate_ (Chapter 9), can you write the required forms of _recapitulate?_

| NOUN:      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------- |
| ADJECTIVE: | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. |

When you _capitulate_ (kƏ-PICH′-Ə-layt′), etymologically you arrange in headings, or, as the meaning of the verb naturally evolved, you arrange conditions of surrender, as when an army _capitulates_ to the enemy forces under prearranged conditions; or, by further natural extension, you stop resisting and give up, as in, “He realized there was no longer any point in resisting her advances, so he reluctantly _capitulated._” Can you write the noun form of _capitulate?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**5. mere vegetables**

_Vegetable_ is from Latin _vegeto_, to live and grow, which is what vegetables do—but that’s _all_ they do, so to _vegetate_, is, by implication, to do no more than stay alive, stuck in a rut, leading an inactive, unstimulating, emotionally and intellectually stagnant existence. _Vegetation_ (vej′-Ə-TAY′-shƏn) is any dull, passive, stagnant existence; also any plant life, as the thick _vegetation_ of a jungle.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                      | MEANING                      |
| ----------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
|   1. _e_- (_ex_-)                         | out                          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   2. _nervus_                             | nerve                        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   3. _en_-                                | in                           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   4. _ergon_                              | work                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   5. _syn_-                               | with, together               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   6. -_ic_                                | adjective suffix             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   7. -_ion_                               | noun suffix                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   8. _ab_-                                | away                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
|   9. _nego_                               | to deny                      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 10. _caput, capitis_                      | head                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 11. _de_-                                 | negative prefix              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 12. _capitulum_                           | little head, chapter heading |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 13. _re_-                                 | again                        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 14. -_ory_                                | adjective suffix             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |
| 15. _vegeto_                              | to live and grow             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                              |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _enervation_      | en′-Ər-VAY′-shƏn           |
| ---------------------- | -------------------------- |
|   2. _synergism_       | SIN′-Ər-jiz-Əm             |
|   3. _synergy_         | SIN′-Ər-jee                |
|   4. _synergistic_     | sin′-Ər-JIS′-tik           |
|   5. _castigation_     | kas′-tƏ-GAY′-shƏn          |
|   6. _self-abnegation_ | self-ab′-nƏ-GAY′-shƏn      |
|   7. _negate_          | nƏ-GAYT′                   |
|   8. _negation_        | nƏ-GAY′-shƏn               |
|   9. _decapitate_      | dee-KAP′-Ə-tayt′           |
| 10. _decapitation_     | dee-kap′-Ə-TAY′-shƏn       |
| 11. _recapitulation_   | ree-kƏ-pich′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn   |
| 12. _recapitulatory_   | ree-kƏ-PICH′-Ə-lƏ-tawr′-ee |
| 13. _capitulate_       | kƏ-PICH′-Ə-layt′           |
| 14. _capitulation_     | kƏ-pich′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn       |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. enervation         | a. tongue-lashing                                          |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. synergism, synergy | b. denial; destruction                                     |
| 3. castigation        | c. a lopping off of one’s head                             |
| 4. self-abnegation    | d. summary; review of main points                          |
| 5. negation           | e. self-denial                                             |
| 6. decapitation       | f. utter exhaustion; mental, emotional, and physical drain |
| 7. recapitulation     | g. a working together for greater effect                   |
| 8. capitulation       | h. surrender                                               |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–h, 3–a, 4–e, 5–b, 6–c, 7–d, 8–g

***

**Do you understand the words?**

1\. enervating—refreshing

SAME      OPPOSITE

2\. synergistic—neutralizing

SAME      OPPOSITE

3\. castigation—scolding

SAME      OPPOSITE

4\. self-abnegation—egoism

SAME      OPPOSITE

5\. negate—accept

SAME      OPPOSITE

6\. decapitate—behead

SAME      OPPOSITE

7\. recapitulatory—summarizing

SAME      OPPOSITE

8\. capitulate—resist

SAME      OPPOSITE

***

KEY:  1–O, 2–O, 3–S, 4–O, 5–O, 6–S, 7–S, 8–O

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. to give in

&#x20; 1\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. working together for greater effect (_adj._)

&#x20; 2\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. total fatigue

&#x20; 3\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. for the purpose of summarizing or review (_adj._)

&#x20; 4\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. self-denial

&#x20; 5\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_-A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. deny; render ineffective; nullify

&#x20; 6\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. process by which two or more substances produce a greater effect than the sum of the individual effects

&#x20; 7\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. to cut off the head of

&#x20; 8\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. strong censure

&#x20; 9\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. to surrender

10\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–capitulate, 2–synergistic, 3–enervation, 4–recapitulatory, 5–self-abnegation, 6–negate, 7–synergism _or_ synergy, 8–decapitate, 9–castigation, 10–capitulate

***

(_End of Session 43_)

### SESSION 44

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. not the real McCoy**

_Simulate_ is from Latin _simulo_, to copy; and _simulo_ itself derives from the Latin adjectives _similis_, like or similar.

_Simulation_ (sim′-yƏ-LAY′-shƏn), then, is copying the real thing, pretending to be the genuine article by taking on a similar appearance. The _simulation_ of joy is quite a feat when you really feel depressed.

Genuine pearls grow inside oysters; _simulated_ pearls are synthetic, but look like the ones from oysters. (Rub a pearl against your teeth to tell the difference—the natural pearl feels gritty.) So the frequent advertisement of an inexpensive necklace made of “genuine _simulated_ pearls” can fool you if you don’t know the word—you’re being offered a genuine fake.

_Dissimulation_ (dƏ-sim′-yƏ-LAY′-shƏn) is something else! When you _dissimulate_ (dƏ-SIM′-yƏ-layt′), you hide your true feelings by making a pretense of opposite feelings. (Then again, maybe it’s not something completely else!)

Sycophants are great _dissimulators_—they may feel contempt,but show admiration; they may feel negative, but express absolutely positive agreement.

A close synonym of _dissimulate_ is _dissemble_ (dƏ-SEM′-bƏl), which also is to hide true feelings by pretending the opposite; or, additionally, to conceal facts, or one’s true intentions, by deception; or, still further additionally, to pretend ignorance of facts you’d rather not admit, when, indeed, you’re fully aware of them.

The noun is _dissemblance_ (dƏ-SEM′-blƏns).

In _dissimulate_ and _dissemble_, the negative prefix _dis_- acts largely to make both words pejorative.

**2. hints and helps**

The verb _intimate_ is from Latin _intimus_, innermost, the same root from which the adjective _intimate_ (IN′-tƏ-mƏt) and its noun _intimacy_ (IN′-tƏ-mƏ-see) are derived; but the relationship is only in etymology, not in meaning. An _intimation_ (in′-tƏ-MAY′-shƏn) contains a significance buried deep in the innermost core, only a hint showing. As you grow older, you begin to have _intimations_ that you are mortal; when someone aims a .45 at you, or when a truck comes roaring down at you as you drive absent-mindedly against a red light through an intersection, you are suddenly _very sure_ that you are mortal.

_Alleviate_ is a combination of Latin _levis_, light (not heavy), the prefix _ad_-, to, and the verb suffix. (_Ad_- changes to _al_- before a root starting with _l_-.)

If something _alleviates_ your pain, it makes your pain lighter for you; if I _alleviate_ your sadness, I make it lighter to bear; and if you need some _alleviation_ (Ə-lee′-vee-AY′-shƏn) of your problems, you need them made lighter and less burdensome. To _alleviate_ is to relieve only temporarily, not to cure or do away with. (_Relieve_ is also from _levis_, plus _re_-, again—to make light or easy again.) The adjective form of _alleviate_ is _alleviative_ (Ə-LEE′-vee-ay′-tiv)—aspirin is an _alleviative_ drug.

Anything light will rise—so from the prefix _e- (ex_-), out, plus _levis_, we can construct the verb _elevate_, etymologically, to raise out, or, actually, raise up, as to _elevate_ one’s spirits, raise them up, make them lighter; or _elevate_ someone to a higher position, which is what an _elevator_ does.

Have you ever seen a performance of magic in which a person or an object apparently rises in the air as if floating? That’s _levitation_ (lev′-Ə-TAY′-shƏn)—rising through no visible means. (I’ve watched it a dozen times and never _could_ figure it out!) The verb, to so rise, is _levitate_ (LEV′-Ə-tayt′).

And how about _levity_ (LEV′-Ə-tee)? That’s lightness too, but of a different sort—lightness in the sense of frivolity, flippancy, joking, or lack of seriousness, especially when solemnity, dignity, or formality is required or more appropriate, as in “tones of _levity_,” or as in, “Levity is out of place at a funeral, in a house of worship, at the swearing-in ceremonies of a President or Supreme Court Justice,” or as in, “Okay, enough _levity_—now let’s get down to business!”

**3. sharing someone’s misery**

Latin _miser_, wretched, the prefix _con_- (which, as you know, becomes _com_- before a root beginning with _m_-), together or with, and the verb suffix -_ate_ are the building blocks from which _commiserate_ is constructed. “I _commiserate_ with you,” then, means, “I am wretched together with you—I share your misery.” The noun form? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

_Miser, miserly, miserable, misery_ all come from the same root.

**4. swing and sway**

_Vacillate_—note the single _c_, double _l_—derives from Latin _vacillo_, to swing back and forth. The noun form? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

People who swing back and forth in indecision, who are irresolute, who can, unfortunately, see both, or even three or four, sides of every question, and so have difficulty making up their minds, are _vacillatory_ (VAS′-Ə-lƏ-tawr′-ee). They are also, usually, _ambivalent_ (am-BIV′-Ə-lƏnt)—they have conflicting and simultaneous emotions about the same person or thing; or they want to go but they also want to stay; or they love something, but they hate it too. The noun is _ambivalence_ (am-BIV′-Ə-lƏns)—from _ambi_ both. (Remember _ambivert_ and _ambidextrous_ from Chapter 3?)

_Ambivalence_ has best been defined (perhaps by Henny Youngman—if he didn’t say it first, he should have) as watching your mother-in-law drive over a cliff in your new Cadillac.

To _vacillate_ is to swing mentally or emotionally. To sway back and forth physically is _oscillate_—again note the double _l_—(OS′-Ə-layt′), from Latin _oscillum_, a swing. A pendulum _oscillates_, the arm of a metronome _oscillates_, and people who’ve had much too much to drink _oscillate_ when they try to walk. The noun? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                      | MEANING                 |
| ----------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
|   1. _simulo_                             | to copy                 |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   2. _similis_                            | like, similar           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   3. _dis_-                               | pejorative prefix       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   4. _ad_- (_al_-)                        | to, toward              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   5. _levis_                              | light                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   6. -_ate_                               | verb suffix             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   7. -_ion_                               | noun suffix             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   8. _e_- (_ex_-)                         | out                     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
|   9. _intimus_                            | innermost               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
| 10. _miser_                               | wretched                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
| 11. _vacillo_                             | to swing back and forth |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
| 12. _ambi_-                               | both                    |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |
| 13. _oscillum_                            | a swing                 |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                         |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _simulation_   | sim′-yƏ-LAY′-shƏn    |
| ------------------- | -------------------- |
|   2. _dissimulate_  | dƏ-SIM′-yƏ-layt′     |
| 3. _dissimulation_  | dƏ-sim′-yƏ-LAY′-shƏn |
|   4. _dissemble_    | dƏ-SEM′-bƏl          |
|   5. _dissemblance_ | dƏ-SEM′-blƏns        |
|   6. _intimation_   | in′-tƏ-MAY′-shƏn     |
|   7. _alleviation_  | Ə-lee′-vee-AY′-shƏn  |
|   8. _alleviative_  | Ə-LEE′-vee-ay′-tiv   |
|   9. _levitate_     | LEV′-Ə-tayt′         |
| 10. _levitation_    | lev′-Ə-TAY′-shƏn     |
| 11. _levity_        | LEV′-Ə-tee           |
| 12. _commiseration_ | kƏ-miz′-Ə-RAY′-shƏn  |
| 13. _vacillation_   | vas′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn     |
| 14. _vacillatory_   | VAS′-Ə-lƏ-tawr′-ee   |
| 15. _ambivalent_    | am-BIV′-Ə-lƏnt       |
| 16. _ambivalence_   | am-BIV′-Ə-lƏns       |
| 17. _oscillate_     | OS′-Ə-layt′          |
| 18. _oscillation_   | os′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn      |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. simulation      | a. hint                                                |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------ |
|   2. dissemble     | b. flippancy or joking when seriousness is required    |
|   3. intimation    | c. a sharing of grief                                  |
|   4. alleviation   | d. physical swaying; swinging action, as of a pendulum |
|   5. levitate      | e. a swinging back and forth in indecision             |
|   6. levity        | f. pretense                                            |
|   7. commiseration | g. conflicted and contrary feelings                    |
|   8. vacillation   | h. rise in the air (as by magic or illusion)           |
|   9. ambivalence   | i. pretend                                             |
| 10. oscillation    | j. a lightening; a making less severe                  |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–i, 3–a, 4–j, 5–h, 6–b, 7–c, 8–e, 9–g, 10–d

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. dissimulate  | a. pretense of ignorance                                 |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. dissemblance | b. a rising and floating in air                          |
| 3. alleviative  | c. having simultaneous and contrary feelings             |
| 4. levitation   | d. tending to swing back and forth in indecision         |
| 5. vacillatory  | e. to swing back and forth like a pendulum               |
| 6. ambivalent   | f. to hide real feelings by pretending opposite feelings |
| 7. oscillate    | g. tending to ease (pain, burdens, suffering, etc.)      |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–a, 3–g, 4–b, 5–d, 6–c, 7–e

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. simulated—genuine

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 2\. dissimulate—pretend

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 3\. dissemble—be truthful

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 4\. intimation—hint

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 5\. alleviation—reduction

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 6\. levitate—sink

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 7\. levity—flippancy

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 8\. vacillation—decisiveness

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 9\. ambivalent—confused

SAME      OPPOSITE

10\. oscillate—sway

SAME      OPPOSITE

***

KEY:  1–O, 2–S, 3–O, 4–S, 5–S, 6–O, 7–S, 8–O, 9–S, 10–S

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. to swing back and forth

&#x20; 1\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. feeling both ways at the same time (_adj._)

&#x20; 2\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. to conceal real feelings

&#x20; 3\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. pretense

&#x20; 4\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. to pretend ignorance though knowing the facts

&#x20; 5\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. joking; frivolity; flippancy

&#x20; 6\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. indecisive

&#x20; 7\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. to rise in the air, as by illusion

&#x20; 8\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. tending to ease (pain, etc.) (_adj._)

&#x20; 9\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. a sharing of another’s grief

10\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–oscillate, 2–ambivalent, 3–dissimulate _or_ dissemble, 4–simulation, 5–dissemble, 6–levity, 7–vacillatory _or_ vacillating, 8–levitate, 9–alleviative _or_ alleviating, 10–commiseration

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Complete exhaustion:

(a) synergism, (b) enervation, (c) negation

&#x20; 2\. Co-operation in producing effects:

(a) synergy, (b) castigation, (c) capitulation

&#x20; 3\. Lop off the head of:

(a) castigate, (b) capitulate, (c) decapitate

&#x20; 4\. deny; render ineffective:

(a) castigate, (b) negate, (c) recapitulate

5\. stagnate:

(a) intimate, (b) simulate, (c) vegetate

&#x20; 6\. concealment of true feelings:

(a) simulation, (b) dissimulation, (c) dissemblance

&#x20; 7\. sympathy:

(a) levity, (b) ambivalence, (c) commiseration

&#x20; 8\. indecisiveness:

(a) vacillation, (b) oscillation, (c) dissimulation

&#x20; 9\. aware of contrary feelings:

(a) alleviative, (b) dissimulating, (c) ambivalent

***

KEY:  1–b, 2–a, 3–c, 4–b, 5–c, 6–b _and_ c, 7–c, 8–a, 9–c

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| ROOT                      | MEANING                            |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _nervus_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   enervate        |                                    |
|   2. _ergon_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   energy          |                                    |
|   3. _nego_               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   self-abnegation |                                    |
|   4. _caput, capitis_     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   decapitate      |                                    |
|   5. _capitulum_          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   recapitulate    |                                    |
|   6. _vegeto_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vegetate        |                                    |
|   7. _simulo_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   dissimulate     |                                    |
|   8. _similis_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   similarity      |                                    |
|   9. _levis_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   levity          |                                    |
| 10. _intimus_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   intimation      |                                    |
| 11. _miser_               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   commiserate     |                                    |
| 12. _vacillo_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vacillate       |                                    |
| 13. _ambi_-               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   ambivalent      |                                    |
| 14. _oscillum_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   oscillate       |                                    |

***

KEY:  1–nerve, 2–work, 3–deny, 4–head, 5–little head, chapter heading, 6–live and grow, 7–to copy, 8–like, similar, 9–light, 10–innermost, 11–wretched, 12–swing back and forth, 13–both, 14–a swing

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST <a href="#page473" id="page473"></a>

We have previously met the Greek prefix _syn_-, together or with, in _synonym_ (“names together”) and _sympathy_ (“feeling with”), and again in this chapter in _synergism_ (“working together”).

_Syn_- is a most useful prefix to know. Like Latin _con_-, (together or with) and _ad_- (to, toward), the final letter changes depending on the first letter of the root to which it is attached. _Syn_- becomes _sym_- before _b, m_, and _p._

Can you construct some words using _syn_-, or _sym-?_

1\. Etymologically, Jews are “led together” in a house of worship (_agogos_, leading). Can you construct the word for this temple or place of worship? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

2\. There is a process by which dissimilar organisms live together (_bios_, life) in close association, each in some way helping, and getting help from, the other (like the shark and the pilot fish). What word, ending in -_sis_, designates such a process? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

What would the adjective form be? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. Using Greek _phone_, sound, write the word that etymologically refers to a musical composition in which the sounds of all instruments are in harmony together \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Using the suffix -_ic_, write the adjective form of this word: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

4\. Combine _sym_- with _metron_, measurement, to construct a word designating similarity of shape on both sides (i.e., “measurement together”): \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Write the adjective form of this word: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

5\. _Syn_- plus _dromos_, a running, are the building blocks of a medical word designating a group of symptoms that occur (i.e., run) together in certain diseases. Can you figure out the word? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. The same _dromos_, a running, combines with Greek _hippos_, horse, to form a word referring to a place in ancient Greece inwhich horse and chariot races were run. The word? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

7\. _Hippos_, horse, plus Greek _potamos_, river, combine to form a word designating one of the three pachyderms we discussed in an earlier chapter. The word? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(_Answers in Chapter 18_.)

#### PICKING YOUR FRIENDS’ BRAINS

You can build your vocabulary, I have said, by increasing your familiarity with new ideas and by becoming alert to the new words you meet in your reading of magazines and books.

There is still another productive method, one that will be particularly applicable in view of all the new words you are learning from your study of these pages.

That method is _picking your friends’ brains._

Intelligent people are interested in words because words are symbols of ideas, and the person with an alert mind is always interested in ideas.

You may be amazed, if you have never tried it, to find that you can stir up an animated discussion by asking, in a social group that you attend, “What does \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ mean?” (Use any word that particularly fascinates you.) Someone in the group is likely to know, and almost everyone will be willing to make a guess. From that point on, others in the group will ask questions about their own favorite words (most people do have favorites), or about words that they themselves have in some manner recently learned. As the discussion continues along these lines, you will be introduced to new words yourself, and if your friends have fairly good vocabularies you may strike a rich vein of pay dirt and come away with a large number of words to add to your vocabulary.

This method of picking your friends’ brains is particularly fruitful because you will be learning not from a page of print (as in this book or as in your other reading) but from real live persons—the same sources that children use to increase their vocabulariesat such prodigious rates. No learning is quite as effective as the learning that comes from other people—no information in print can ever be as vivid as information that comes from another human being. And so the words you pick up from your friends will have an amazingly strong appeal, will make a lasting impression on your mind.

Needless to say, your own rich vocabulary, now that you have come this far in the book, will make it possible for you to contribute to your friends’ vocabulary as much as, if not more than, you take away—but since giving to others is one of the greatest sources of a feeling of self-worth, you can hardly complain about this extra dividend.

(_End of Session 44_)
