# 9

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT ACTIONS

## (_Sessions 19–23_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What verb means to:

• _belittle?_

• _be purposely confusing?_

• _tickle someone’s fancy?_

• _flatter fulsomely?_

• _prohibit some food or activity?_

• _make unnecessary?_

• _work against?_

• _spread slander?_

• _give implicit forgiveness for a misdeed?_

• _change hostility to friendliness?_

***

### SESSION 19 <a href="#page192" id="page192"></a>

Verbs are incalculably useful to you.

Every sentence you think, say, read, or write contains an implied or expressed verb, for it is the verb that carries the action, the movement, the force of your ideas.

As a young child, you used verbs fairly early.

Your first words, of course, were probably _nouns_, as you identified the things or people around you.

_Mama, Dada, doll, baby, bottle_, etc. perhaps were the first standard syllables you uttered, for naming concrete things or real persons is the initial step in the development of language.

Soon there came the ability to express _intangible_ ideas, and then you began to use simple verbs—_go, stop, stay, want, eat, sleep_, etc.

As you gained maturity, your verbs expressed ideas of greater and greater complexity; as an adult you can describe the most involved actions in a few simple syllables—if you have a good store of useful verbs at your command.

The richer and more extensive your vocabulary of verbs, the more accurately and expressively you can communicate your understanding of actions, reactions, attitudes, and emotions.

Let’s be specific.

#### IDEAS

**1. playing it down**

Ready to go back thirty or more years? Consider some post-World War II American political history:

Harry Truman couldn’t win the 1948 election. The pollsters said so, the Republicans heartily agreed, even the Democrats,some in high places, believed it. Mr. Truman himself was perhaps the only voter in the country who was not entirely convinced.

Came the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November—well, if you were one of those who stayed up most of the night listening to the returns, and then kept your ear to the radio most of the next day, you recall how you reacted to the unique Truman triumph.

It was no mean accomplishment, thought many people. Pure accident, said others. If one out of twelve voters in a few key states had changed his ballot, Harry could have gone back to selling ties, one Republican apologist pointed out. It wasn’t anything Truman did, said another; it was what Dewey didn’t do. No credit to Truman, said a third; it was the farmers—or labor—or the Republicans who hadn’t bothered to vote—or the ingenious miscounting of ballots. No credit to Truman, insisted a fourth; it was Wallace’s candidacy—it was the Democrats—it was Republican overconfidence—it was sunspots—it was the Communists—it was the civil service workers who didn’t want to lose their cushy jobs—it was really Roosevelt who won the election.

Anyway Harry didn’t accomplish a thing—he was just a victim of good fortune.

What were the apologists for Dewey’s failure doing?

They were _disparaging_ Truman’s achievement.

**2. playing it safe**

Willing to look at some more history of the late 1940s?

Of course, Dewey did campaign, in his own way, for the presidency. As the Republican aspirant, he had to take a stand on the controversial Taft-Hartley Act.

Was he for it? He was for that part of it which was _good._ Naturally, he was against any of the provisions which were _bad._ Was he for it? The answer was _yes_—and also _no._ Take whichever answer you wanted most to hear.

What was Dewey doing?

He was _equivocating._

**3. enjoying the little things**

Have you ever gone through a book that was so good you kept hugging yourself mentally as you read? Have you ever seen a play or motion picture that was so charming that you felt sheer delight as you watched? Or perhaps you have had a portion of pumpkin-chiffon pie, light and airy and mildly flavored, and with a flaky, delicious crust, that was the last word in gustatory enjoyment?

Now notice the examples I have used. I have not spoken of books that grip you emotionally, of plays and movies that keep you on the edge of your seat in suspense, or of food that satisfies a ravenous hunger. These would offer quite a different, perhaps more lasting and memorable, type of enjoyment. I have detailed, rather, mental or physical stimuli that excite enjoyably but not too sharply—a delightful novel, a charming play, a delicious dessert.

How do such things affect you?

They _titillate_ you.

**4. playing it way up**

You know how the teen-agers of an earlier generation adored, idolized, and overwhelmed Frank Sinatra, Elvis Presley, the Beatles?

And of course you know how certain people fall all over visiting celebrities—best-selling authors, much publicized artists, or famous entertainers. They show them ingratiating, almost servile attention, worship and flatter them fulsomely.<sup>1</sup>

How do we say it in a single word?

They _adulate_ such celebrities.

**5. accentuating the negative**

What does the doctor say to you if you have low blood sugar? “No candy, no pastries, no chocolate marshmallow cookies, no ice cream!”, your morale dropping lower and lower as each favorite goody is placed on the forbidden list.

What, in one word, is the doctor doing?

The doctor is _proscribing_ harmful items in your diet.

**6. accentuating the affirmative**

You are warm, friendly, enthusiastic, outgoing, easy to please; you are quick to show appreciation, yet accept, without judgment or criticism, the human weaknesses of others.

You are a fascinating talker, an even better listener.

You believe in, and practice, honest self-disclosure; you feel comfortable with yourself and therefore with everyone else; and you have a passionate interest in experiencing, in living, in relating to people.

Need you have any fears about making friends? Obviously not.

Your characteristics and temperament _obviate_ such fears.

**7. playing it wrong**

Theodor Reik, in his penetrating book on psychoanalysis _Listening with the Third Ear_, talks about neurotic people who unconsciously wish to fail. In business interviews they say exactly the wrong words, they do exactly the wrong things, they seem intent (as, _unconsciously_, they actually are) on insuring failure in every possible way, though consciously they are doing their best to court success.

What effect does such a neurotic tendency have?

It _militates_ against success.

**8. playing it dirty**

“Harry?” _He’s a closet alcoholic._ Maud? _She’s sleeping around_—and her stupid husband doesn’t suspect a thing. Bill? _He’s embezzling from his own company._ Paul? _He’s a child molester._&#x53;ally? You don’t know that _she’s a notorious husband-beater?_”

What is this character doing?

He’s _maligning_ everyone.

**9. giving the benefit of any doubt**

Do you think it’s all right to cheat on your income taxes? At least just a little? It’s wrong, of course, but doesn’t everybody do it?

How do you feel about marital infidelity? Are you inclined to overlook the occasional philandering of the male partner, since, after all, to invent a cliché, men are essentially polygamous by nature?

If your answers are in the affirmative, how are you reacting to such legal or ethical transgressions?

You _condone_ them.

**10. changing hostility**

Unwittingly you have done something that has aroused anger and resentment in your best friend. You had no desire to hurt him, yet he makes it obvious that he feels pretty bitter about the whole situation. (Perhaps you failed to invite him to a gathering he wanted to come to; or you neglected to consult him before making a decision on a matter in which he felt he should have some say.) His friendship is valuable to you and you wish to restore yourself in his good graces. What do you do?

You try to _placate_ him.

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _disparage_  | dis-PAIR′-Əj     |
| ----------------- | ---------------- |
|   2. _equivocate_ | ee-KWIV′-Ə-kayt′ |
|   3. _titillate_  | TIT′-Ə-layt′     |
| 4. _adulate_      | AJ′-Ə-layt′      |
|   5. _proscribe_  | prō-SKRĪB′       |
|   6. _obviate_    | OB′-vee-ayt′     |
|   7. _militate_   | MIL′-Ə-tayt      |
|   8. _malign_     | mƏ-LĪN′          |
|   9. _condone_    | kƏn-DŌN′         |
| 10. _placate_     | PLAY′-kayt′      |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. disparage    | a. flatter lavishly                                           |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. equivocate | b. work against                                               |
|   3. titillate  | c. prohibit                                                   |
|   4. adulate    | d. forgive                                                    |
|   5. proscribe  | e. change hostility to friendliness                           |
|   6. obviate    | f. purposely talk in such a way as to be vague and misleading |
|   7. militate   | g. slander                                                    |
|   8. malign     | h. play down                                                  |
|   9. condone    | i. make unnecessary                                           |
| 10. placate     | j. tickle; stimulate pleasurably                              |

***

KEY:  1–h, 2–f, 3–j, 4–a, 5–c, 6–i, 7–b, 8–g, 9–d, 10–e

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Do you normally _disparage_ something you admire?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Do you _equivocate_ if you think it unwise to take a definite stand?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Do pleasant things _titillate_ you?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Do emotionally mature people need constant _adulation?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Is sugar _proscribed_ for diabetics?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Does a substantial fortune _obviate_ financial fears?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7.Does a worker’s inefficiency often _militate_ against his keeping his job?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Do people enjoy being _maligned?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Do we generally _condone_ the faults of those we love?

YES      NO

10\. Can you sometimes _placate_ a person by apologizing?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–yes, 3–yes, 4–no, 5–yes, 6–yes, 7–yes, 8–no, 9–yes, 10–yes

***

**Can you use the words?**

In this exercise you gain the value of actually writing a new word as a meaningful solution to a problem. To think about a word, to say it, to write it, to use it—that is the road to word mastery. Write the verb that best fits each situation.

&#x20; 1\. You’ve been asked to take a stand on a certain issue, but you don’t have the courage to be either definitely for or against.

You \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

&#x20; 2\. You spread around an unpleasant story that you know will blacken someone’s reputation.

You \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ that person.

&#x20; 3\. Your friend is justifiably angry—you asked him to go to a party with you, ignored him all evening, and then finally left with someone else. What must you do if you wish to restore the relationship?

You must try to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ him.

&#x20; 4\. You virtually worship your therapist. You express your admiration in lavish flattery; you praise her in such excessive terms that she appears devoid of all human frailty.

You \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ her.

&#x20; 5\. You are crowding 260 on the scales, so your doctor warns against high-calorie meals, rich desserts, second helpings, excessive carbohydrates, etc.

The doctor \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ these foods.

&#x20; 6.Your child Johnnie has smacked the neighbor’s kid—entirely without provocation, you are forced to admit. But after all, you think, tomorrow the other kid will, with equal lack of provocation, probably smack Johnnie.

You \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Johnnie’s behavior.

&#x20; 7\. When your son, understandably expecting praise, mentions the three B’s and two A’s he earned in his courses, you respond, callously, “Is that the best you can do? What stopped you from getting _all_ A’s?”

You \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ his accomplishment.

&#x20; 8\. You have run out of cash and plan to go to the bank to make a withdrawal; then unexpectedly you discover a twenty-dollar bill you secreted in your desk drawer months ago.

Your find \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a trip to the bank.

&#x20; 9\. You are the soul of honesty, but unfortunately, you have a sneaky, thievish, sinister look—and no one ever trusts you.

Your appearance \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ against you.

10\. The centerfold of _Playboy_ or _Playgirl_ provides a mild and agreeable stimulation.

The centerfold \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ you.

***

KEY:  1–equivocate, 2–malign, 3–placate, 4–adulate, 5–proscribes, 6–condone, 7–disparage, 8–obviates, 9–militates, 10–titillates

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. change hostility into friendliness

&#x20; 1\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. make unnecessary

&#x20; 2\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. belittle

&#x20; 3\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. overlook or forgive a transgression

&#x20; 4\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. tickle; delight; stimulate pleasurably

&#x20; 5\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. spread malicious rumors about

&#x20; 6\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7.purposely use language susceptible of opposite interpretations

&#x20; 7\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. act to disadvantage of

&#x20; 8\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. forbid

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. worship; flatter fulsomely

10\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–placate, 2–obviate, 3–disparage, 4–condone, 5–titillate, 6–malign, 7–equivocate, 8–militate (against), 9–proscribe, 10–adulate

***

(_End of Session 19_)

### SESSION 20

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. equality**

If you play golf, you know that each course or hole has a certain _par_, the number of strokes allowed according to the results achieved by expert players. Your own accomplishment on the course will be at _par_, above _par_, or below _par._

Similarly, some days you may feel up to _par_, other days below _par._

_Par_ is from a Latin word meaning _equal._ You may try, when you play golf, to _equal_ the expert score; and some days you may, or may not, feel _equal_ to your usual self.

When we speak of _parity_ payments to farmers, we refer to payments that show an _equality_ to earnings for some agreed-upon year.

So when you _disparage_, you lower someone’s _par_, or feeling o&#x66;_&#x65;quality_, (_dis_- as you know, may be a negative prefix). The noun is _disparagement_ (dis-PAIR′-Əj-mƏnt), the adjective _disparaging_ (dis-PAIR′-Əj-ing), as in “Why do you always make _disparaging_ remarks about me?”

_Parity_ (PAIR′-Ə-tee) as a noun means _equality; disparity_ (dis-PAIR′-Ə-tee) means a lack of _equality_, or a difference. We may speak, for example, of the _disparity_ between someone’s promise and performance; or of the _disparity_ between the rate of vocabulary growth of a child and of an adult. The adjective _disparate_ (DIS′-pƏ-rƏt) indicates _essential_ or _complete_ difference or inequality, as in “Our philosophies are so _disparate_ that we can never come to any agreement on action.”

The word _compare_ and all its forms (_comparable, comparative_, etc.) derive from _par_, equal. Two things are _compared_ when they have certain _equal_ or similar qualities, (_con-, com_-, together, with).

_Pair_ and _peer_ are also from _par._ Things (shoes, socks, gloves, etc.) in _pairs_ are _equal_ or similar; your _peers_ are those _equal_ to you, as in age, position, rank, or ability. Hence the expression “to be judged by a jury of one’s peers.”

(British _peers_, however, such is the contradiction of language, were _nobles._)

**2. how to say yes and no**

_Equivocate_ is built on another Latin word meaning _equal—aequus_ (the spelling in English is always _equ_-)—plus _vox, vocis_, voice.

When you _equivocate_ (Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kayt′), you seem to be saying both _yes_ and _no_ with _equal voice._ An _equivocal_ (Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kƏl) answer, therefore, is by design vague, indefinite, and susceptible of contradictory interpretations, quite the opposite of an _unequivocal_ (un′-Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kƏl) response, which says _Yes!_ or _No!_, and no kidding. Professional politicians are masters of _equivocation_ (Ə-kwiv′-Ə-KAY′-shƏn)—they are, on most vital issues, mugwumps; they sit on a fence with their _mugs_ on one side and their _wumps_ on the other. You will often hear candidates for office say, publicly, that they _unequivocally_ promise, if elected, to…; and then they start _equivocating_ for all they are worth, like peoplewho say, “Let me be perfectly _frank_ with you”—and then promptly and glibly lie through their teeth.

**3. statements of various kinds**

Do not confuse _equivocal_ with _ambiguous_ (am′-BIG′-y-Əs). An _equivocal_ statement is purposely, deliberately (and with malice aforethought) couched in language that will be deceptive; an _ambiguous_ statement is _accidentally_ couched in such language. _Equivocal_ is, in short, purposely _ambiguous._

You will recall that _ambi_-, which we last met in _ambivert_ and _ambidextrous_, is a root meaning _both;_ anything _ambiguous_ may have _both_ one meaning and another meaning. If you say, “That sentence is the height of _ambiguity_,” you mean that you find it vague because it admits of both affirmative and negative interpretations, or because it may mean two different things. _Ambiguity_ is pronounced am′-bƏ-GY-Ə-tee.

Another type of statement or word contains the possibility of two interpretations—one of them suggestive, risqué, or sexy. Such a statement or word is a _double entendre._ This is from the French and translates literally as _double meaning._ Give the word as close a french pronunciation as you can—DB′-lƏhn-TAHN′-drƏ. (The _n_’s are nasalized, the _r_ somewhat throaty, and the final syllable is barely audible.)

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                               | MEANING                                        |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
|   1. _par_                                         | equal                                          |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   2. -_ment_                                       | noun suffix attached to verbs                  |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   3. -_ity_                                        | noun suffix attached to adjectives             |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   4. _dis_-                                        | negative prefix                                |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   5. _con-, com_-                                  | with, together                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   6. _aequus_ (_equ_-)                             | equal                                          |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
| 7. _vox, vocis_                                    | voice                                          |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   8. -_ate_                                        | verb suffix                                    |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
|   9. -_ion_                                        | noun suffix attached to verbs ending in -_ate_ |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
| 10. -_ous_                                         | adjective suffix                               |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |
| 11. _ambi_-                                        | both                                           |
| ENGLISH WORD:   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                                |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _parity_         | PAIR′-Ə-tee          |
| --------------------- | -------------------- |
|   2. _disparity_      | dis-PAIR′-Ə-tee      |
|   3. _disparate_      | DIS′-pƏ-rƏt          |
|   4. _disparagement_  | dis-PAIR′-Əj-mƏnt    |
|   5. _disparaging_    | dis-PAIR′-Əj-ing     |
|   6. _peer_           | PEER                 |
|   7. _equivocate_     | Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kayt′      |
|   8. _equivocation_   | Ə-kwiv′-Ə-KAY′-shƏn  |
|   9. _equivocal_      | Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kƏl        |
| 10. _unequivocal_     | un′-Ə-KWIV′-Ə-kƏl    |
| 11. _ambiguous_       | am-BIG′-y-Əs         |
| 12. _ambiguity_       | am′-bƏ-GY′-Ə-tee     |
| 13. _double entendre_ | DOOB′-lƏhn-TAHN′-drƏ |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. parity          | a. belittlement                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. disparity       | b. act of being deliberately vague or indirectly deceptive; statement that is deceptive or purposely open to contrary interpretations |
| 3. disparagement   | c. quality of being open to misinterpretation; statement with this quality                                                            |
|   4. peer          | d. statement or word with two meanings, one of them risqué, indelicate, or of possible sexual connotation                             |
| 5. equivocation    | e. inequality                                                                                                                         |
| 6. ambiguity       | f. equality                                                                                                                           |
| 7. double entendre | g. one’s equal                                                                                                                        |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–e, 3–a, 4–g, 5–b, 6–c, 7–d

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Is there a _disparity_ in age between a grandfather and his granddaughter?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Is an _equivocal_ statement clear and direct?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Is an _unequivocal_ answer vague and misleading?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Are politicians often masters of _equivocation?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Are _ambiguous_ sentences somewhat confusing?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Are people with _disparate_ perceptions of life likely to experience reality in the same way?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is a _disparaging_ look one of admiration?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. When people _equivocate_, are they evading the issue?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Is the deliberate use of _double entendres_ likely to shock puritanical people?

YES      NO

10\. Are supervisors and their subordinates _peers?_

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–yes, 5-yes, 6–no, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–yes, 10–no

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. accidentally vague

&#x20; 1\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. purposely vague

&#x20; 2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. equality

&#x20; 3\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. word or statement one meaning of which may be interpreted as risqué

&#x20; 4\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. lack of equality

&#x20; 5\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. belittlement

&#x20; 6\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. clear; direct; capable of only one interpretation

&#x20; 7\. U\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. essentially or widely unequal or different

&#x20; 8\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. one’s equal in age, rank, etc.

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. to use words in a calculated effort to mislead or to be ambiguous

10\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–ambiguous, 2–equivocal, 3–parity, 4–double entendre, 5–disparity, 6–disparagement, 7–unequivocal, 8–disparate, 9–peer, 10–equivocate

***

(_End of Session 20_)

### SESSION 21

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. more on equality**

The root _aequus_, spelled _equ_- in English words, is a building block of:

1\. _equity_ (EK′-wƏ-tee)—justice, fairness; i.e., equal treatment.(By extension, stocks in the financial markets are _equities_, and the value of your home or other property over and above the amount of the mortgage you owe is your _equity_ in it.) The adjective is _equitable_ (EK′-wƏ-tƏ-bƏl).

2\. _inequity_ (in-EK′-wƏ-tee)—injustice, unfairness (_equity_ plus the negative prefix _in_-). Adjective: _inequitable_ (in-EK′-wƏ-tƏ-bƏl).

3\. _iniquity_ (in-IK′-wƏ-tee)—by one of those delightful surprises and caprices characteristic of language, the change of a single letter (_e_ to _i_), extends the meaning of a word far beyond its derivation and original denotation. Injustice and unfairness are sinful and wicked, especially if you naïvely believe that life is fair. So a “den of _iniquity_” is a place where vice flourishes; an _iniquity_ is a sin or vice, or an egregiously immoral act; and _iniquity_ is wickedness, sinfulness. Adjective: _iniquitous_ (in-IK′-wƏ-tƏs).

4\. _equinox_ (EE′-kwƏ-noks′)—etymologically, “equal night,” a combination of _aequus_ and _nox, noctis_, night. The _equinox_, when day and night are of equal length, occurs twice a year: about March 21, and again about September 21 or 22. (The adjective is _equinoctial_—ee′-kwƏ-NOK′-shƏl.) _Nocturnal_ (nok-TURN′-Əl), derived from _nox, noctis_, describes people, animals, or plants that are active or flourish at night rather than during daylight hours. Cats and owls are _nocturnal_, as is the moonflower, whose blossoms open at night; not to mention “night people,” whose biorhythms are such that they function better after the sun goes down, and who like to stay up late and sleep well into midmorning. A _nocturne_ (NOK′-turn) is a musical composition of dreamy character (i.e., night music), or a painting of a night scene.

5\. _equanimity_ (ee′-kwƏ-NIM′-Ə-tee _or_ ek′-wƏ-NIM′-Ə-tee)—etymologically _aequus_ plus _animus_, mind, hence “equal mind.” Maintain your _equanimity_, your evenness of temper, your composure, your coolness or calmness, when everyone around you is getting excited or hysterical, and you will probably be considered an admirable person, though one might wonder what price you pay for such emotional control. (Other words built on _animus_, mind, will be discussed in Chapter 12.)

6\. _Equability_ (ee′-kwƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee _or_ ek′-wƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee)—a close synonym of _equanimity._ A person of _equable_ (EE′-kwƏ-bƏ&#x6C;_&#x6F;r_ EK′-wƏ-bƏl) temperament is characteristically calm, serene, unflappable, even-tempered.

7\. _equilibrium_ (ee′-kwƏ-LIB′-ree-Əm)—by derivation _aequus_ plus _libra_, balance, weight, pound, hence “equal balance.” _Libra_ (LĪ′-brƏ) is the seventh sign of the zodiac, represented by a pair of scales. Now you know, in case the question has been bothering you, why the abbreviation for the word _pound_ is _lb._ and why the symbol for the British _pound_, the monetary unit, is £. _Equilibrium_ is a state of _physical_ balance, especially between opposing forces. When you are very drunk you may have difficulty keeping your _equilibrium_—the force of gravity is stronger than your ability to stay upright. An _equilibrist_ (Ə-KWIL′-Ə-brist), as you might guess, is a professional tightrope walker—a performer successfully defying the law of gravity (when sober) by _balancing_ on a thin overhead wire.

The _equator_ divides the earth into _equal_ halves, and words like _equation, equivalent, equidistant, equiangular_, and _equilateral_ (from Latin _latus, lateris_, side) are self-explanatory.

**2. not to be confused with horses**

_Equestrian_ (Ə-KWES′-tree-Ən) is someone on a horse (as _pedestrian_ is someone on foot); an _equestrienne_ (Ə-kwes′-tree-EN′) is a woman on a horse (if you _must_ make the distinction); and _equine_ (EE′-kwīn) is like a horse, as in appearance or characteristics, or descriptive of horses.

_Equestrian_ is also an adjective referring to horseback riding, as an _equestrian_ statue; and _equine_ is also a noun, i.e., a horse.

So the _equ_- in these words, from Latin _equus_, horse, is not to be confused with the _equ_- in the words of the previous section—that _equ_- is from _aequus_, equal. (Remember, also, not to confuse the _ped_- in _pedestrian_, from Latin _pedis_, foot, with the _ped- in pediatrician_, from Greek _paidos_, child.)

**3. hear voices?**

_Equivocal_, you will recall, combines _aequus_ with _vox, vocis_, voice; and _vox, vocis_ combines with _fero_, to bear or carry, to form _vociferous_ (vō-SIF′-Ər-Əs), etymologically “carrying (much)voice,” hence loud, noisy, clamorous, as _vociferous_ demands (not at all quiet or subtle), or the _vociferous_ play of young children (“Please! Try to be quiet so Dad can get his work done!”), though unfortunately TV addiction has abnormally eliminated child noises, at least during the program breaks between commercials. (_Vociferous_ will be discussed at greater length in Chapter 10.)

If you are _vocal_ (VŌ′-kƏl), you express yourself readily and freely by voice; _vocal_ sounds are voiced; _vocal_ music is sung; and you know what your _vocal_ cords are for.

To _vocalize_ (VŌ′-kƏ-līz′) is to give voice to (“_Vocalize_ your anger, don’t hold it in!”), or to sing the _vocals_ (or voice parts) of music. (Can you write the noun form of the verb _vocalize?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.) A _vocalist_ (VŌ′-kƏ-list) is a singer. And _Magnavox (vox_ plus _magnus_, large) is the trade name for a brand of radios and TV sets.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING                |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   1. _aequus_ (_equ_-)                            | equal                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   2. _in_-                                        | negative prefix        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   3. _nox, noctis_                                | night                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   4. _animus_                                     | mind                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   5. -_ity_                                       | noun suffix            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   6. _libra_                                      | balance, weight, pound |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   7. -_ist_                                       | person who             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   8. _latus, lateris_                             | side                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
|   9. _equus_                                      | horse                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 10. -_ine_                                        | like, descriptive of   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 11. _pedis_                                       | foot                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 12. _paidos_ (_ped_-)                             | child                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 13. _vox, vocis_                                  | voice                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 14. _fero_                                        | to bear, carry         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |
| 15. _magnus_                                      | large                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                        |

#### USING THE WORDS <a href="#page209" id="page209"></a>

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _equity_      | EK′-wƏ-tee        |
| ------------------ | ----------------- |
|   2. _equitable_   | EK′-wƏ-tƏ-bƏl     |
|   3. _inequity_    | in-EK′-wƏ-tee     |
|   4. _inequitable_ | in-EK′-wƏ-tƏ-bƏl  |
|   5. _iniquity_    | in-IK′-wƏ-tee     |
|   6. _iniquitous_  | in-IK′-wƏ-tƏs     |
|   7. _equinox_     | EE′-kwƏ-noks′     |
|   8. _equinoctial_ | ee′-kwƏ-NOK′-shƏl |
|   9. _nocturnal_   | nok-TURN′-Əl      |
| 10. _nocturne_     | NOK′-turn         |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _equanimity_  | ee′-kwƏ (_or_ ek′-wƏ) -NIM′-Ə-tee |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------- |
|   2. _equability_  | ee′-kwƏ (_or_ ek′-wƏ) -BIL′-Ə-tee |
|   3. _equable_     | EE′-kwƏ-bƏl _or_ EK′-wƏ-bƏl       |
|   4. _equilibrium_ | ee′-kwƏ-LIB′-ree-Əm               |
|   5. _equilibrist_ | ee-KWIL′-Ə-brist                  |
|   6. _equilateral_ | ee-kwƏ-LAT′-Ər-Əl                 |
|   7. _equestrian_  | Ə-KWES′-tree-Ən                   |
|   8. _equine_      | EE′-kwīn                          |
|   9. _vociferous_  | vō-SIF′-Ər-Əs                     |
| 10. _vocal_        | VŌ′-kƏl                           |
| 11. _vocalize_     | VŌ′-kƏ-līz′                       |
| 12. _vocalization_ | vō′-kƏ-lƏ-ZAY′-shƏn               |
| 13. _vocalist_     | VŌ′-kƏ-list                       |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. equity        | a. time when night and day are of equal length                     |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 2. inequity      | b. balance of mind; composure; calmness under trying circumstances |
|   3. iniquity    | c. horseback rider                                                 |
|   4. equinox     | d. a horse                                                         |
|   5. nocturne    | e. sinfulness; wickedness; immoral act; sin                        |
|   6. equanimity  | f. unfairness, injustice                                           |
|   7. equilibrium | g. tightrope walker                                                |
|   8. equestrian  | h. singer                                                          |
|   9. equilibrist | i. fairness, justice                                               |
| 10. equine       | j. balance, especially between opposing forces                     |
| 11. vocalist     | k. night music                                                     |

***

KEY:  1–i, 2–f, 3–e, 4–a, 5–k, 6–b, 7–j, 8–c, 9–g, 10–d, 11–h

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. equitable     | a. descriptive of time when night and day are of equal length    |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. inequitable | b. give voice to; sing                                           |
|   3. iniquitous  | c. having equal sides                                            |
|   4. equinoctial | d. using, or referring to, the voice; freely expressing by voice |
|   5. nocturnal   | e. noisy, loud, clamorous                                        |
|   6. equable     | f. calm, unruffled, even-tempered                                |
|   7. equilateral | g. fair, just                                                    |
|   8. vociferous  | h. referring or pertaining to, or active at, night               |
|   9. vocal       | i. sinful, wicked, immoral                                       |
| 10. vocalize     | j. unfair, unjust                                                |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–j, 3–i, 4–a, 5–h, 6–f, 7–c, 8–e, 9–d, 10–b

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Is life always _equitable?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Does the cynic expect more _inequity_ than _equity_ in life?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Do ethical people practice _iniquity?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Does the _equinox_ occur once a month?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Are _nocturnal_ animals active at night?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. If you generally preserve your _equanimity_, do you often get very excited?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is it easy to maintain your _equilibrium_ on icy ground?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is _equability_ the mark of a calm, even-tempered person?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Does an _equilateral_ triangle have equal sides?

YES      NO

10\. Is an _equine_ a dog?

YES      NO

11\. If you demand something _vociferously_, do you make a lot of noise?

YES      NO

12\. If you are _vocal_, do you have difficulty expressing yourself?

YES      NO

13\. Is a _vocalist_ the same as an instrumentalist?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–yes, 3–no, 4–no, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–yes, 10–no, 11–yes, 12–no, 13–no

***

**Can you recall the words? (I)**

1\. to give voice to; to express aloud; to sing

1\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. tightrope walker

2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. active or flourishing at night

3\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. descriptive or characteristic of, or like, a horse

4\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5.referring to the voice; skillful or fluent in expressing by voice

5\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. calm and unflappable in temperament

6\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. wicked, sinful

7\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. night music

8\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. fairness, justice

9\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–vocalize, 2–equilibrist, 3–nocturnal, 4–equine, 5–vocal, 6–equable, 7–iniquitous, 8–nocturne, 9–equity

***

**Can you recall the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. loud, noisy, clamorous

&#x20; 1\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. person on horseback

&#x20; 2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. calmness or evenness of temper

&#x20; 3\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. unfair, unjust

&#x20; 4\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. sin; wickedness; grossly immoral behavior

&#x20; 5\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. time when day and night are of equal length

&#x20; 6\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. fair, just, evenhanded

&#x20; 7\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. physical balance; balance between opposing forces

&#x20; 8\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. having equal sides

&#x20; 9\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. singer

10\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–vociferous, 2–equestrian _or_ equestrienne, 3–equanimity _or_ equability, 4–inequitable, 5–iniquity, 6–equinox, 7–equitable, 8–equilibrium, 9–equilateral, 10–vocalist

***

(_End of Session 21_)

### SESSION 22 <a href="#page213" id="page213"></a>

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. how to tickle**

_Titillate_ comes from a Latin verb meaning _to tickle_, and may be used both literally and figuratively. That is (literally), you can _titillate_ by gentle touches in strategic places; you are then causing an actual (and always very pleasant) physical sensation. Or you can (figuratively) _titillate_ people, or their minds, fancies, palates (and this is the more common use of the word), by charm, brilliance, wit, promises, or in any other way your imagination can conceive.

_Titillation_ (tit′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn) has the added meaning of light sexual stimulation. (Note that both noun and verb are spelled with a double _I, not_ a double _t._)

**2. how to flatter**

A _compliment_ is a pleasant and courteous expression of praise; _flattery_ is stronger than a compliment and often considered insincere. _Adulation_ (aj′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn) is flattery and worship carried to an excessive, ridiculous degree. There are often public figures (entertainers, musicians, government officials, etc.) who receive widespread _adulation_, but those not in the public eye can also be _adulated_, as a teacher by students, a wife by husband (and vice versa), a doctor by patients, and so on. (The derivation is from a Latin verb meaning _to fawn upon._)

The adjective _adulatory_ (aj′-Ə-lƏ-TAWR′-ee) ends in -_ory_, a suffix we are meeting for the first time in these pages. (Other adjective suffixes: -_al_, -_ic, -ical_, -_ous._)

**3. ways of writing**

_Proscribe_, to forbid, is commonly used for medical, religious, or legal prohibitions.

A doctor _proscribes_ a food, drug, or activity that might prove harmful to the patient. The church _proscribes_, or announces a _proscription_ (prō-SKRIP′-shƏn) against, such activities as may harm its parishioners. The law _proscribes_ behavior detrimental to the public welfare.

Generally, one might concede, _proscribed_ activities are the most pleasant ones—as Alexander Woolcott once remarked, if something is pleasurable, it’s sure to be either immoral, illegal, or fattening.

The derivation is the prefix _pro_-, before, plus _scribo, scriptus_, to write. In ancient Roman times, a man’s name was written on a public bulletin board if he had committed some crime for which his property or life was to be forfeited; Roman citizens in good standing would thereby know to avoid him. In a similar sense, the doctor writes down those foods or activities that are likely to commit crimes against the patient’s health—in that way the patient knows to avoid them.

_Scribo, scriptus_ is the building block of scores of common English words: _scribe, scribble, prescribe, describe, subscribe, script, the Scriptures, manuscript, typescript_, etc. _Describe_ uses the prefix _de_-, down—to _describe_ is, etymologically, “to write down” about. _Manuscript_, combining _manus_, hand (as in _manual_ labor), with _scriptus_, is something handwritten—the word was coined before the invention of the typewriter. _The Scriptures_ are holy writings. To _subscribe_ (as to a magazine) is to write one’s name _under_ an order or contract (_sub_-, under, as in _subway, subsurface_, etc.); to _subscribe_ to a philosophy or a principle is figuratively to write one’s name _under_ the statement of such philosophy or principle.

To _inscribe_ is to write _in_ or _into_ (a book, for example, or metal or stone). A _postscript_ is something written after (Latin _post_, after) the main part is finished.

Note how -_scribe_ verbs change to nouns and adjectives:

| VERB        | NOUN         | ADJECTIVE    |
| ----------- | ------------ | ------------ |
| _prescribe_ | prescription | prescriptive |
| _subscribe_ | subscription | subscriptive |

Can you follow the pattern?

| _describe_  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| _inscribe_  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| _proscribe_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |

**4. it’s obvious**

You are familiar with the word _via_, by way of, which is from the Latin word for _road._ (The _Via Appia_ was one of the famous highways of ancient Roman times.) When something is _obvious_, etymologically it is right there in the middle of the road where no one can fail to see it—hence, easily seen, not hidden, conspicuous. And if you meet an obstacle in the road and dispose of it forthwith, you are doing what _obviate_ says. Thus, if you review your work daily in some college subject, frenzied “cramming” at the end of the semester will be _obviated._ A large and steady income _obviates_ fears of financial insecurity; leaving for work early will _obviate_ worry about being late. _To obviate_, then, is to make unnecessary, to do away with, to prevent by taking effective measures or steps against (an occurrence, a feeling, a requirement, etc.). The noun is _obviation_ (ob′-vee-AY′-shƏn).

Surprisingly, _via_, road, is the root in the English word _trivial_ (_tri_-, three). Where three roads intersect, you are likely to find busy traffic, lots of people, in short a fairly public place, so you are not going to talk of important or confidential matters, lest you be overheard. You will, instead, talk of _trivial_ (TRIV′-ee-Əl) things—whatever is unimportant, without great significance; you will confine your conversation to _trivialities_ (triv′-ee-AL′-Ə-teez) or to _trivia_ (also a plural noun, pronounced TRIV′-ee-Ə), insignificant trifles.

**5. war**

_Militate_ derives from _militis_, one of the forms of the Latin noun meaning _soldier_ or _fighting man._ If something _militates_ against you, it fights against you, i.e., works to your disadvantage. Thus, your timidity may _militate_ against your keeping your friends. (_Militate_ is always followed by the preposition _against_ and, lik&#x65;_&#x6F;bviate_, never takes a personal subject—_you_ don’t _militate_ against anyone, but some habit, action, tendency, etc. _militates_ against someone or something.)

The adjective _militant_ (MIL′-Ə-tƏnt) comes from the same root. A _militant_ reformer is one who fights for reforms; a _militant_ campaign is one waged aggressively and with determination. The noun is _militancy_ (MIL′-Ə-tƏn-see), and _militant_ is also a noun for the person—“Sally is a _militant_ in the Women’s Liberation movement.”

_Military_ and _militia_ also have their origin in _militis._

**6. first the bad news**

Built on Latin _malus_, bad, evil, to _malign_ is to speak evil about, to defame, to slander. _Malign_ is also an adjective meaning _bad, harmful, evil, hateful_, as in “the _malign_ influence of his unconscious will to fail.” Another adjective form is _malignant_ (mƏ-LIG′-nƏnt), as in “a _malignant_ glance,” i.e., one showing deep hatred, or “a _malignant_ growth,” i.e., one that is cancerous (bad).

The noun of _malignant_ is _malignancy_ (mƏ-LIG′-nƏn-see), which, medically, is a cancerous growth, or, generally, the condition, state, or attitude of harmfulness, hatefulness, evil intent, etc. The noun form of the adjective _malign_ is _malignity_ (mƏ-LIG′-nƏ-tee).

Observe how we can construct English words by combining _malus_ with other Latin roots.

Add the root _dico, dictus_, to say or tell, to form _malediction_ (mal′-Ə-DIK′-shƏn), a curse, i.e., an evil saying. Adjective: _maledictory_ (mal′-Ə-DIK′-tƏ-ree).

Add the root _volo_, to wish, to will, or to be willing, and we can construct the adjective _malevolent_ (mƏ-LEV′-Ə-lent), wishing evil or harm—a _malevolent_ glance, attitude, feeling, etc. The noun is _malevolence_ (mƏ-LEV′-Ə-lƏns).

Add the root _facio, factus_, to do or make (also spelled, in English words, _fec-, fic-, factus_, or, as a verb ending, -_fy_), to form the adjective _maleficent_ (mƏ-LEF′-Ə-sƏnt), doing harm or evil, or causing hurt—_maleficent_ acts, deeds, behavior.

Can you figure out, and pronounce, the noun form of _maleficent?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

A _malefactor_ (MAL′-Ə-fak′-tƏr) is a wrongdoer, an evildoer, a criminal—a _malefactor_ commits a _malefaction_ (mal′-Ə-FAK′-shƏn), a crime, an evil deed.

French is a “Romance” language, that is, a language based on Roman or Latin (as are, also, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, and Romanian), and so Latin _malus_ became French _mal_, bad, the source of _maladroit_ (mal′-Ə-DROYT′), clumsy, bungling, awkward, unskillful, etymologically, having a “bad right hand.” (See _adroit_, Chapter 3.) The noun is _maladroitness._ Also from French _mal: malaise_ (mƏ-LAYZ′), an indefinite feeling of bodily discomfort, as in a mild illness, or as a symptom preceding an illness; etymologically, “bad ease,” just as _disease_ (dis-ease) is “lack of ease.”

Other common words that you are familiar with also spring from Latin _malus: malicious, malice, malady;_ and the same _malus_ functions as a prefix in words like _maladjusted, malcontent, malpractice, malnutrition_, etc., all with the connotation of _badness._

And what’s the _good_ news? See Session 23.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING          |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
|   1. -_ory_                                       | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   2. _scribo, scriptus_                           | to write         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   3. _de_-                                        | down             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   4. _manus_                                      | hand             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   5. _sub_-                                       | under            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   6. _in_-                                        | in, into         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   7. _post_                                       | after            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   8. _via_                                        | road             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   9. _tri_-                                       | three            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 10. _militis_                                     | soldier          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 11. _malus_                                       | bad, evil        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 12. _dico, dictus_                                | to say, tell     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 13. _volo_                                        | to wish          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 14._facio_ (_fec-, fic-, fy_)                     | to do, make      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 15. -_ence, -ancy_                                | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |

#### WORKING WITH THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _titillation_    | tit′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn    |
| --------------------- | ------------------- |
|   2. _adulation_      | aj′-Ə-LAY′-shƏn     |
|   3. _adulatory_      | AJ′-Ə-lƏ-tawr′-ee   |
|   4. _proscription_   | prō-SKRIP′-shƏn     |
|   5. _proscriptive_   | prō-SKRIP′-tiv      |
|   6. _obviation_      | ob′-vee-AY′-shƏn    |
|   7. _trivial_        | TRIV′-ee-Əl         |
|   8. _trivialities_   | triv′-ee-AL′-Ə-teez |
|   9. _trivia_         | TRIV′-ee-Ə          |
| 10. _militant_        | MIL′-Ə-tƏnt         |
| 11. _militancy_       | MIL′-Ə-tƏn-see      |
| 12. _malign_ (_adj._) | mƏ-LĪN′             |
| 13. _malignity_       | mƏ-LIG′-nƏ-tee      |
| 14. _malignant_       | mƏ-LIG′-nƏnt        |
| 15. _malignancy_      | mƏ-LIG′-nƏn-see     |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _malediction_  | mal′-Ə-DIK′-shƏn   |
| ------------------- | ------------------ |
|   2. _maledictory_  | mal′-Ə-DIK′-tƏ-ree |
|   3. _malevolent_   | mƏ-LEV′-Ə-lƏnt     |
|   4. _malevolence_  | mƏ-LEV′-Ə-lƏns     |
|   5. _maleficent_   | mƏ-LEF′-Ə-sƏnt     |
|   6. _maleficence_  | mƏ-LEF′-Ə-sƏns     |
|   7. _malefactor_   | MAL′-Ə-fak′-tƏr    |
|   8. _malefaction_  | mal′-Ə-FAK′-shƏn   |
|   9. _maladroit_    | mal′-Ə-DROYT′      |
| 10. _maladroitness_ | mal′-Ə-DROYT′-nƏs  |
| 11. _malaise_       | mƏ-LAYZ′           |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. titillation     | a. prohibition                                                         |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. adulation     | b. hatefulness; harmfulness                                            |
|   3. proscription  | c. clumsiness                                                          |
|   4. militancy     | d. quality of wishing evil; ill-will                                   |
|   5. malignity     | e. prevention; fact or act of making unnecessary or of doing away with |
|   6. malediction   | f. worship; excessive flattery                                         |
|   7. maladroitness | g. vague feeling of bodily discomfort                                  |
|   8. obviation     | h. pleasurable stimulation; tickling                                   |
|   9. malevolence   | i. a curse                                                             |
| 10. malaise        | j. aggressiveness                                                      |

***

KEY:  1–h, 2–f, 3–a, 4–j, 5–b, 6–i, 7–c, 8–e, 9–d, 10–g

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. adulatory    | a. aggressive; “fighting”                 |
| --------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| 2. proscriptive | b. of no great consequence                |
| 3. militant     | c. bearing ill-will; wishing harm         |
| 4. malign       | d. of the nature of curses                |
| 5. trivial      | e. clumsy, awkward                        |
| 6. maledictory  | f. worshipful, adoring                    |
| 7. malevolent   | g. bad, harmful, hurtful                  |
| 8. maladroit    | h. relating or pertaining to prohibitions |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–h, 3–a, 4–g, 5–b, 6–d, 7–c, 8–e

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Does a _malignant_ look indicate kindly feelings?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Is a cancer sometimes called a _malignancy?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Are _trivialties_ important?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. If your house is cluttered with _trivia_, are these objects of great value?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Do people enjoy having _maledictions_ hurled at them?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Is a _maleficent_ act likely to cause harm or hurt?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Does _maladroitness_ show skill?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is a _malefactor_ a wrongdoer?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Does an _adulatory_ attitude show exaggerated admiration?

YES      NO

10\. Is _militancy_ the same as passiveness?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–yes, 3–no, 4–no, 5–no, 6–yes, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–yes, 10–no

***

**Can you recall the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. clumsy, awkward

&#x20; 1\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. bearing ill-will; wishing harm

&#x20; 2\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. pleasurable stimulation

&#x20; 3\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. a person aggressively fighting for a cause

&#x20; 4\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. prohibition against something injurious

&#x20; 5\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. excessive flattery; exaggerated admiration

&#x20; 6\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. vague feeling of general physical discomfort

&#x20; 7\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. a criminal; a wrongdoer

&#x20; 8\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9.a curse

&#x20; 9\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. a crime; bad or evil act or behavior

10\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–maladroit, 2–malevolent, 3–titillation, 4–militant, 5–proscription, 6–adulation, 7–malaise, 8–malefactor, 9–malediction, 10–malefaction

***

**Can you recall the words? (II)**

1\. fact or act of making unnecessary or of taking effective steps toward prevention

1\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. aggressive attitude

2\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. harmful, hurtful, bad

3\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. unimportant, insignificant

4\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. unimportant, insignificant things; trifles

5\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. cursing; of the nature of, or relating to, curses (_adj._)

6\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. worshipful

7\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–obviation, 2–militancy, 3–malign, malignant, _or_ maleficent, 4–trivial, 5–trivialities _or_ trivia, 6–maledictory, 7–adulatory

***

(_End of Session 22_)

### SESSION 23 <a href="#page222" id="page222"></a>

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. so now what’s the good news?**

_Malus_ is _bad; bonus_ is _good._ The adverb from the Latin adjective _bonus_ is _bene_, and _bene_ is the root found in words that contrast with the _mal_- terms we studied in the previous session.

So _benign_ (bƏ-NĪN′) and _benignant_ (bƏ-NIG′-nƏnt) are kindly, good-natured, not harmful, as in _benign_ neglect, a _benign_ judge, a _benign_ tumor (not cancerous), a _benignant_ attitude to malefactors and scoundrels. The corresponding nouns are _benignity_ (bƏ-NIG′-nƏ-tee) and _benignancy_ (bƏ-NIG′-nƏn-see).

A _malediction_ is a curse; a _benediction_ (ben′-Ə-DIK′-shƏn) is a blessing, a “saying good.” The adjective is _benedictory_ (ben′-Ə-DIK′-tƏ-ree).

In contrast to _maleficent_ is _beneficent_ (bƏ-NEF′-Ə-sƏnt), doing good. The noun? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In contrast to _malefactor_ is _benefactor_ (BEN′-Ə-fak′-tƏr), one who does good things for another, as by giving help, providing financial gifts or aid, or coming to the rescue when someone is in need. If you insist on making sexual distinctions, a woman who so operates is a _benefactress_ (BEN′-Ə-fak′-trƏs). And, of course, the person receiving the _benefaction_ (ben-Ə-FAK′-shƏn), the recipient of money, help, etc., is a _beneficiary_ (ben′-Ə-FISH′-Ər-ee _or_ ben-Ə-FISH′-ee-air-ee). _Benefit_ and _beneficial_ are other common words built on the combination of _bene_ and a form of _facio_, to do or make.

So let others be _malevolent_ toward you—confuse them by being _benevolent_ (bƏ-NEV′-Ə-lƏnt)—wish them well. (Turn the other cheek? Why not?) The noun? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The adjective _bonus_, good, is found in English _bonus_, extra payment, theoretically—but not necessarily—for some good act;in _bonbon_, a candy (a “good-good,” using the French version of the Latin adjective); and in _bona fide_ (BŌ′-nƏ-FĪD′ _or_ BŌ′-nƏ-FĪ′-dee), etymologically, “in good faith,” hence valid, without pretense, deception, or fraudulent intent—as a _bona fide_ offer, a _bona fide_ effort to negotiate differences, etc. _Fides_ is Latin for _faith_ or _trust_, as in _fidelity_ (fƏ-DEL′-Ə-tee), faithfulness; _Fido_, a stereotypical name for a dog, one’s faithful friend; _infidel_ (IN′-fƏ-dƏl), one who does _not_ have the right faith or religion (depending on who is using the term), or one who has _no_ religion (Latin _in_-, not); and _infidelity_ (in′-fƏ-DEL′-Ə-tee), unfaithfulness, especially to the marriage vows.

**2. say, do, and wish**

_Benediction_ and _malediction_ derive from _dico, dictus_, to say, tell. _Dictate, dictator, dictation, dictatorial_ (dik′-tƏ-TAWR′-ee-Əl)—words that signify telling others what to do (“Do as I say!”)—are built on _dico_, as is _predict_, to tell beforehand, i.e., to say that something will occur before it actually does (_pre_-, before, as in _prescient_).

The brand name _Dictaphone_ combines _dico_ with _phone_, sound; _contradict_, to say against, or to make an opposite statement (“Don’t _contradict_ me!”; “That _contradicts_ what I know”) combines _dico_ with _contra_-, against, opposite; and _addiction_, etymologically “a saying to or toward,” or the compulsion to say “yes” to a habit, combines _dico_ with _ad_-, to, toward.

_Facio, factus_, to do or make (as in _malefactor, benefactor_), has, as noted, variant spellings in English words: _fec-, fic_-, or, as a verb ending, -_fy._

Thus _factory_ is a place where things are _made_ (-_ory_, place where); a _fact_ is something _done_ (i.e., something that occurs, or exists, or is, therefore, true); _fiction_, something _made_ up or invented; _manufacture_, to _make_ by hand (_manus_, hand, as in _manuscript, manual_), a word coined before the invention of machinery; _artificial, made_ by human art rather than occurring in nature, as _artificial_ flowers, etc.; and _clarify, simplify, liquefy, magnify_ (to _make_ clear, simple, liquid, larger) among hundreds of other -_fy_ verbs.

_Volo_, to wish, to will, to be willing (as in _malevolent, benevolent_),occurs in _voluntary, involuntary, volunteer_, words too familiar to need definition, and each quite obviously expressing _wish_ or _willingness._ Less common, and from the same root, is _volition_ (vō-LISH′-Ən), the act or power of willing or wishing, as in “of her own _volition_,” i.e., _voluntarily_, or “against her _volition._”

**3. if you please!**

_Placate_ is built on the root _plac_- which derives from two related Latin verbs meaning, 1) _to please_, and 2) _to appease, soothe_, or _pacify._

If you succeed in _placating_ an angry colleague, you turn that person’s hostile attitude into one that is friendly or favorable. The noun is _placation_ (play-KAY′-shƏn), the adjective either _placative_ (PLAK′-Ə-tiv _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-tiv) or _placatory_ (PLAK′-Ə-taw-ree _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-taw-ree). A more _placatory_ attitude to those you have offended may help you regain their friendship; when husband and wife, or lovers, quarrel, one of them finally makes a _placative_ gesture if the war no longer fulfills his or her neurotic needs—one of them eventually will wake up some bright morning in a _placatory_ mood.

But then, such is life, the other one may at that point be _implacable_ (im-PLAK′-Ə-bƏl _or_ im-PLAY′-kƏ-bƏl)—_im_- is a respelling of _in_-, not, before the letter _p._ One who _can_ be soothed, whose hostility _can_ be changed to friendliness, is _placable_ (PLAK′-Ə-bƏl _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-bƏl).

_Implacable_ has taken on the added meaning of _unyielding to entreaty or pity;_ hence, _harsh, relentless_, as “The governor was _implacable_ in his refusal to grant clemency.”

The noun form of _implacable_ is _implacability_ (im-plak′-Ə-BIL′-Ə-tee _or_ im-play′-kƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee). Can you write (and pronounce) the noun derived from _placable?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

If you are _placid_ (PLAS′-id), you are calm, easygoing, serene, undisturbed—etymologically, you are pleased with things as they are. Waters of a lake or sea, or the emotional atmosphere of a place, can also be _placid._ The noun is _placidity_ (plƏ-SID′-Ə-tee).

If you are _complacent_ (kƏm-PLAY-sƏnt), you are pleased with yourself (_com_-, from _con_-, with, together); you may, in fact, such is one common connotation of the word, be smug, _too_ pleasedwith your position or narrow accomplishments, too easily self-satisfied, and the hour of reckoning may be closer than you realize. (Humans, as you know, are delighted to be critical of the contentment of others.)

The noun is _complacence_ (kƏm-PLAY′-sƏns) or _complacency_ (kƏm-PLAY′-sƏn-see).

**4. how to give—and forgive**

To _condone_ is to forgive, overlook, pardon, or be uncritical of (an offense, or of an antisocial or illegal act). You yourself might or might not indulge in such behavior or commit such an offense, but you feel no urge to protest, or to demand censure or punishment for someone else who does. You may _condone_ cheating on one’s income tax, shoplifting from a big, impersonal supermarket, or exceeding the speed limit, though you personally observe the law with scrupulousness. (Not everyone, however, is so charitable or forgiving.) The noun is _condonation_ (kon′-dō-NAY′-shƏn).

_Condone_ is built on Latin _dono_, to give, the root found in _donor_, one who gives; _donate_, to give; and _donation_, a gift.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING                            |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _bonus, bene_                                | good, well                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   2. _fides_                                      | faith                              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   3. _dico, dictus_                               | to say, tell                       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   4. _pre_-                                       | before, beforehand                 |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   5. _phone_                                      | sound                              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   6. _contra_-                                    | against, opposite                  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   7. _ad_-                                        | to, toward                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   8. _facio, factus, fec-, fic-, -fy_             | to make or do                      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
|   9. -_ory_                                       | place where                        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 10. _manus_                                       | hand                               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 11. _volo_                                        | to wish, to will, to be willing    |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 12. _plac_-                                       | to please, appease, soothe, pacify |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 13. -_ive_                                        | adjective suffix                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 14. -_ory_                                        | adjective suffix                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 15. _im_- (_in_-)                                 | not; negative prefix               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 16. _com_- (_con_-)                               | with, together                     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |
| 17. _dono_                                        | to give                            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                    |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _benign_      | bƏ-NĪN′                                        |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------- |
|   2. _benignity_   | bƏ-NIG′-nƏ-tee                                 |
|   3. _benignant_   | bƏ-NIG′-nƏnt                                   |
|   4. _benignancy_  | bƏ-NIG′-nƏn-see                                |
|   5. _benediction_ | ben′-Ə-DIK′-shƏn                               |
|   6. _benedictory_ | ben′-Ə-DIK′-tƏ-ree                             |
|   7. _beneficent_  | bƏ-NEF′-Ə-sƏnt                                 |
|   8. _beneficence_ | bƏ-NEF′-Ə-sƏns                                 |
|   9. _benefactor_  | BEN′-Ə-fak′-tƏr                                |
| 10. _benefaction_  | ben′-Ə-FAK′-shƏn                               |
| 11. _beneficiary_  | ben′-Ə-FISH′-Ər-ee _or_ ben′-Ə-FISH′-ee-air-ee |
| 12. _benevolent_   | bƏ-NEV′-Ə-lƏnt                                 |
| 13. _benevolence_  | bƏ-NEV′-Ə-lƏns                                 |
| 14. _bona fide_    | BŌ′-nƏ FĪD′ _or_ BŌ′-nƏ FĪ′-dee                |
| 15. _fidelity_     | fƏ-DEL′-Ə-tee                                  |
| 16. _infidelity_   | in′-fƏ-DEL′-Ə-tee                              |
| 17. _infidel_      | IN′-fƏ-dƏl                                     |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _dictatorial_   | dik′-tƏ-TAWR′-ee-Əl                               |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. _volition_      | vō-LISH′-Ən                                       |
|   3. _placation_     | play-KAY′-shƏn                                    |
|   4. _placative_     | PLAK′-Ə-tiv _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-tiv                     |
|   5. _placatory_     | PLAK′-Ə-tawr-ee _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-tawr-ee             |
|   6. _placable_      | PLAK′-Ə-bƏl _or_ PLAY′-kƏ-bƏl                     |
|   7. _implacable_    | im-PLAK′-Ə-bƏl _or_ im-PLAY′-kƏ-bƏl               |
|   8. _placability_   | plak′-Ə-BIL′-Ə-tee _or_ play′-kƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee       |
|   9. _implacability_ | im-plak′-Ə-BIL′-Ə-tee _or_ im-play′-kƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee |
| 10. _placid_         | PLAS′-id                                          |
| 11. _placidity_      | plƏ-SID′-Ə-tee                                    |
| 12. _complacent_     | kƏm-PLAY′-sƏnt                                    |
| 13. _complacence_    | kƏm-PLAY′-sƏns                                    |
| 14. _complacency_    | kƏm-PLAY′-sƏn-see                                 |
| 15. _condonation_    | kon′-dō-NAY′-shƏn                                 |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. benign      | a. wishing good things (for another) ; well disposed                                  |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. benedictory | b. domineering; giving orders in a manner permitting no refusal                       |
| 3. benevolent  | c. not to be soothed or pacified; unyielding to pity or entreaty                      |
| 4. bona fide   | d. tending, or intended, to pacify, to soothe, or to change hostility to friendliness |
| 5. dictatorial | e. kindly, good-natured; not cancerous                                                |
| 6. placatory   | f. calm, unruffled, undisturbed                                                       |
| 7. implacable  | g. self-satisfied; smug                                                               |
| 8. placid      | h. of the nature of, or relating to, blessings                                        |
| 9. complacent  | i. in good faith; sincere; valid                                                      |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–h, 3–a, 4–i, 5–b, 6–d, 7–c, 8–f, 9–g

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. benevolence   | a. recipient of money, kindness, etc.                                        |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. benefaction | b. free will                                                                 |
|   3. beneficiary | c. act of overlooking, or of forgiving, an offense or transgression          |
|   4. infidelity  | d. faithfulness                                                              |
|   5. volition    | e. self-satisfaction; smugness                                               |
|   6. placation   | f. calmness                                                                  |
|   7. fidelity    | g. act of pacifying, or of turning hostility or anger into friendly feelings |
|   8. condonation | h. attitude of wishing good things for another                               |
|   9. placidity   | i. faithlessness                                                             |
| 10. complacency  | j. good deed; act of charity or kindness                                     |

***

KEY:  1–h, 2–j, 3–a, 4–i, 5–b, 6–g, 7–d, 8–c, 9–f, 10–e

***

**Do you understand the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. Are _benedictions_ given in houses of worship?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Is it pleasant to be the recipient of a _beneficent_ act?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Are kind people _benevolent?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Do _placatory_ gestures often heal wounds and soothe disgruntled friends?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Are some unambitious people _complacent?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Does _benignity_ show malice?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is a _benefaction_ an act of philanthropy?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is an _implacable_ foe of corruption likely to _condone_ corrupt acts?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9.Is a _bona fide_ offer made insincerely?

YES      NO

10\. Does a _benignant_ attitude indicate hostility?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–yes, 3–yes, 4–yes, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–yes, 8–no, 9–no, 10–no

***

**Do you understand the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. benign—hateful

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 2\. benignant—kindly

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 3\. benediction—malediction

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 4\. benefactor—evildoer

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 5\. beneficiary—giver

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 6\. benevolent—well disposed

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 7\. bona fide—valid

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 8\. fidelity—unfaithfulness

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 9\. infidel—true believer

SAME      OPPOSITE

10\. dictatorial—submissive

SAME      OPPOSITE

11\. placative—pacifying

SAME      OPPOSITE

12\. implacable—unyielding

SAME      OPPOSITE

13\. placid—calm

SAME      OPPOSITE

14\. complacent—discontented

SAME      OPPOSITE

15\. condonation—forgiveness

SAME      OPPOSITE

***

KEY:  1–O, 2–S, 3–O, 4–O, 5–O, 6–S, 7–S, 8–O, 9–O, 10–O, 11–S, 12–S, 13–S, 14–O, 15–S

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. tending to give orders

&#x20; 1\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. act of overlooking (an offense, etc.)

&#x20; 2\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. unyieldingly hostile; beyond soothing; relentless; pitiless

&#x20; 3\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. intended to soothe or pacify (_adj._)

&#x20; 4\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5.one’s desire, wishes, or unforced will

&#x20; 5\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. calmness

&#x20; 6\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. self-satisfaction; smugness

&#x20; 7\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. non-believer in the “true” religion

&#x20; 8\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. kindly; well disposed

&#x20; 9\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. unfaithfulness

10\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. involving a blessing (_adj._)

11\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. doing something good or kind (_adj._)

12\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. faithfulness

13\. F\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. sincere; valid; in good faith

14\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. one who does something good, kind, or charitable (for another)

15\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16\. a kind or charitable deed

16\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17\. recipient of kindness, gift, etc.

17\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

18\. able to be soothed or pacified

18\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–dictatorial, 2–condonation, 3–implacable, 4–placatory _or_ placative, 5–volition, 6–placidity, 7–complacence _or_ complacency, 8–infidel, 9–benign, benignant, _or_ benevolent, 10–infidelity, 11–benedictory, 12–beneficent, 13–fidelity, 14–bona fide, 15–benefactor, 16–benefaction, 17–beneficiary, 18–placable

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

&#x20; 1\. To belittle:

(a) titillate, (b) disparage, (c) adulate

&#x20; 2.To be purposely confusing:

(a) equivocate, (b) obviate, (c) proscribe

&#x20; 3\. To work to the disadvantage of:

(a) malign, (b) militate, (c) placate

&#x20; 4\. To slander:

(a) malign, (b) condone, (c) placate

&#x20; 5\. Lack of equality:

(a) parity, (b) disparity, (c) ambiguity

&#x20; 6\. Phrase that may have two interpretations, one of them indelicate or off-color:

(a) equivocation, (b) ambiguity, (c) double entendre

&#x20; 7\. Hateful:

(a) malignant, (b) benignant, (c) malaise

&#x20; 8\. Ill will:

(a) malaise, (b) malevolence, (c) maleficence

&#x20; 9\. Kindly:

(a) benevolent, (b) placid, (c) complacent

10\. Inflexibly hostile:

(a) implacable, (b) placatory, (c) militant

11\. Giving orders imperiously:

(a) benedictory, (b) dictatorial, (c) adulatory

12\. Self-satisfaction:

(a) complacency, (b) placation, (c) placidity

***

KEY:  1–b, 2–a, 3–b, 4–a, 5–b, 6–c, 7–a, 8–b, 9–a, 10–a, 11–b, 12–a

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| MEANING                                                                                | ROOT                               |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _par_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   parity                                                                       |                                    |
|   2. _aequus_ (_equ_-)                                                                 | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   equivocal                                                                    |                                    |
|   3. _vox, vocis_                                                                      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vocal                                                                        |                                    |
|   4. _nox, noctis_                                                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   nocturnal                                                                    |                                    |
|   5. _libra_                                                                           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   equilibrist                                                                  |                                    |
|   6. _latus, lateris_                                                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   equilateral                                                                  |                                    |
|   7. _equus_                                                                           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   equine                                                                       |                                    |
| 8. _pedis_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   pedestrian                                                                   |                                    |
|   9. _paidos_ (_ped_-)                                                                 | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   pedagogue                                                                    |                                    |
| 10. _fero_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vociferous                                                                   |                                    |
| 11. _magnus_                                                                           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   magnify                                                                      |                                    |
| 12. _scribo, scriptus_                                                                 | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   proscribe                                                                    |                                    |
| 13. _manus_                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   manuscript                                                                   |                                    |
| 14. _post_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   postscript                                                                   |                                    |
| 15. _via_                                                                              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   trivial                                                                      |                                    |
| 16. _militis_                                                                          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   militate                                                                     |                                    |
| 17. _malus_                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   malefactor                                                                   |                                    |
| 18. _dico, dictus_                                                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   dictatorial                                                                  |                                    |
| 19. _volo_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   volition                                                                     |                                    |
| 20. _facio_ (_fec-, fic-, -fy_)                                                        | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE  benefactor  fiction  simplify                                                 |                                    |
| 21. _bonus_                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   bona fide                                                                    |                                    |
| 22. _fides_                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   fidelity                                                                     |                                    |
| 23. _phone_                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   Dictaphone                                                                   |                                    |
| 24. _plac_-                                                                            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   placate                                                                      |                                    |
| 25. _dono_                                                                             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   donation                                                                     |                                    |

***

KEY:  1–equal, 2–equal, 3–voice, 4–night, 5–balance, 6–side, 7–horse, 8–foot, 9–child, 10–carry, bear, 11–large, 12–write, 13–hand, 14–after, 15–road, 16–soldier, 17–bad, 18–say, tell, 19–wish, 20–do, make, 21–good, 22–faith, 23–sound, 24–please, soothe, pacify, 25–give

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST

1\. Keeping in mind the roots _animus_ in _equanimity_ and _magnus_ in _Magnavox_ or _magnify_, can you combine these two roots to form a noun meaning, etymologically, _largeness of mind?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Can you figure out the adjective form, ending in -_ous_, of the noun you have constucted? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

2\. If _equilateral_ means _equal-sided_, can you construct an adjective meaning _two-sided?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. _Trans_- is a prefix meaning _across._ Build a verb meaning _to write across_ (from one form or language to another): \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. What is the noun derived from this verb? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

4\. What disease was so named on the erroneous assumption that it was caused by “bad air?” \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

5\. _Facio_ may appear in English words as _fec_-. Using the prefix _con_-, together, can you form a noun sometimes used as a synonym for candy, cake, or ice cream (etymologically, “something made together”)? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(_Answers in Chapter 18_)

#### THE THRILL OF RECOGNITION

You have been adding, over the past twenty-three sessions, hundreds of words to your vocabulary; you have been learning hundreds of prefixes, roots, and suffixes that make it possible for you to figure out the meaning of many unfamiliar words you may come across in your reading.

As time goes on and you notice more and more of the words you have studied whenever you read, or whenever you listen to lectures, the radio, or TV, the thrill of recognition plus the immediate comprehension of complex ideas will provide a dividend of incalculable value.

You will hear these words in conversation, and you will begin to use them yourself, unself-consciously, whenever something you want to say is best expressed by one of the words that exactly verbalizes your thinking. Another priceless dividend!

_So keep on! You are involved in a dividend-paying activity that will eventually make you intellectually rich._

(_End of Session 23_)

***

<sup>1</sup> _Fulsome_ (FL′-sƏm) does not mean, despite its appearance, _fully_ or _completely_, but rather, _offensive because of excessiveness or insincerity_, often in reference to compliments, praise, admiration, or flattery.
