# 3

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT PERSONALITY TYPES

## (_Sessions 1–3_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What word best describes your personality if you:

• _are interested solely in your own welfare?_

• _constantly talk about yourself?_

• _dedicate your life to helping others?_

• _turn your mind inward?_

• _turn your mind outward?_

• _hate humanity?_

• _hate women?_

• _hate marriage?_

• _lead a lonely, austere existence?_

***

### SESSION 1 <a href="#page27" id="page27"></a>

Every human being is, in one way or another, unique.

Everyone’s personality is determined by a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

Let us examine ten personality types (one of which might by chance be your very own) that result from the way culture, growth, family background, and environment interact with heredity.

And, of course, we begin not with the words, but with the ideas.

#### IDEAS

**1. me first**

Your attitude to life is simple, direct, and aboveboard—every decision you make is based on the answer to one question: “What’s in it for me?” If your selfishness, greed, and ruthless desire for self-advancement hurt other people, that’s too bad. “This is a tough world, pal, dog eat dog and all that, and I, for one, am not going to be left behind!”

An _egoist_

**2. the height of conceit**

“Now, let’s see. Have you heard about all the money I’m making? Did I tell you about my latest amorous conquest? Let me give you my opinion—I know, because I’m an expert at practically everything!” You are boastful to the point of being obnoxious—you have only one string to your conversational violin, namely, _yourself;_&#x61;nd on it you play a number of monotonous variations: what _you_ think, what _you_ have done, how good _you_ are, how _you_ would solve the problems of the world, etc. ad nauseam.

An _egotist_

**3. let me help you**

You have discovered the secret of true happiness—concerning yourself with the welfare of others. Never mind your own interests, how’s the next fellow getting along?

An _altruist_

**4. leave me alone**

Like a biochemist studying a colony of bacteria under the microscope, you minutely examine your every thought, feeling, and action. Probing, futile questions like “What do other people think of me?”, “How do I look?”, and “Maybe I shouldn’t have said that?” are your constant nagging companions, for you are unable to realize that other people do not spend as much time and energy analyzing you as you think.

You may seem unsocial, yet your greatest desire is to be liked and accepted. You may be shy and quiet, you are often moody and unhappy, and you prefer solitude or at most the company of one person to a crowd. You have an aptitude for creative work and are uncomfortable engaging in activities that require cooperation with other people. You may even be a genius, or eventually turn into one.

An _introvert_

**5. let’s do it together**

You would be great as a teacher, counselor, administrator, insurance agent. You can always become interested—sincerely, vitally interested—in other people’s problems. You’re the life of the party, because you never worry about the effect of your actions, never inhibit yourself with doubts about dignity or propriety. Youare usually happy, generally full of high spirits; you love to be with people—lots of people. Your thoughts, your interests, your whole personality are turned outward.

An _extrovert_

**6. neither extreme**

You have both introverted and extroverted tendencies—at different times and on different occasions. Your interests are turned, in about equal proportions, both inward and outward. Indeed, you’re quite normal—in the sense that your personality is like that of most people.

An _ambivert_

**7. people are no damn good**

Cynical, embittered, suspicious, you hate everyone. (Especially, but never to be admitted, _yourself?_) The perfectibility of the human race? “Nonsense! No way!” The stupidity, the meanness, and the crookedness of most mortals (“Most? Probably all!”)—that is your favorite theme.

A _misanthrope_

**8. women are no damn good**

Sometime in your dim past, you were crossed, scorned, or deeply wounded by a woman (a mother, or mother figure, perhaps?). So now you have a carefully constructed defense against further hurt—you hate _all_ women.

A _misogynist_

**9. “marriage is an institution—and who wants to live in an institution?”**

You will not make the ultimate _legal_ commitment. Members of the opposite sex are great as lovers, roommates, apartment- or house-sharers, but _not_ as lawfully wedded spouses. The ties thatbind are too binding for you. You may possibly believe, and possibly, for yourself, be right, that a commitment is deeper and more meaningful if freedom is available without judicial proceedings.

A _misogamist_

**10. “…  that the flesh is heir to …”**

Self-denial, austerity, lonely contemplation—these are the characteristics of the good life, so you claim. The simplest food and the least amount of it that will keep body and soul together, combined with abstinence from fleshly, earthly pleasures, will eventually lead to spiritual perfection—that is your philosophy.

An _ascetic_

#### USING THE WORDS

You have been introduced to ten valuable words—but in each case, as you have noticed, you have first considered the ideas that these words represent. Now _say_ the words—each one is respelled phonetically so that you will be sure to pronounce it correctly.<sup>1</sup>

_Say each word aloud._ This is the first important step to complete mastery. As you hear a word in your own voice, think of its meaning. Are you quite clear about it? If not, reinforce your learning by rereading the explanatory paragraph or paragraphs.

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _egoist_     | EE′-gō-ist     |
| ----------------- | -------------- |
|   2. _egotist_    | EE′-gō-tist    |
|   3. _altruist_   | AL′-tr-ist     |
|   4. _introvert_  | IN′-trƏ-vurt′  |
|   5. _extrovert_  | EKS′-trƏ-vurt′ |
|   6. _ambivert_   | AM′-bƏ-vurt′   |
| 7. _misanthrope_  | MIS′-Ən-thrōp′ |
|   8. _misogynist_ | mƏ-SOJ′-Ə-nist |
|   9. _misogamist_ | mƏ-SOG′-Ə-mist |
| 10. _ascetic_     | Ə-SET′-ik      |

**Can you work with the words?**

You have taken two long steps toward mastery of the expressive words in this chapter—you have thought about the ideas behind them, and you have said them aloud.

For your third step, match each personality with the appropriate characteristic, action, or attitude.

| 1. egoist        | a. turns thoughts inward                  |
| ---------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
|   2. egotist     | b. hates marriage                         |
|   3. altruist    | c. talks about accomplishments            |
|   4. introvert   | d. hates people                           |
|   5. extrovert   | e. does not pursue pleasures of the flesh |
|   6. ambivert    | f. is interested in the welfare of others |
|   7. misanthrope | g. believes in self-advancement           |
|   8. misogynist  | h. turns thoughts both inward and outward |
|   9. misogamist  | i. hates women                            |
| 10. ascetic      | j. turns thoughts outward                 |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–c, 3–f, 4–a, 5–j, 6–h, 7–d, 8–i, 9–b, 10–e

***

**Do you understand the words?**

Now that you are becoming more and more involved in these ten words, find out if they can make an immediate appeal to your understanding. Here are ten questions—can you indicate, quickly,and without reference to any previous definitions, whether the correct answer to each of these questions is _yes_ or _no?_

&#x20; 1\. Is an _egoist_ selfish?

YES        NO

&#x20; 2\. Is modesty one of the characteristics of the _egotist?_

YES        NO

&#x20; 3\. Is an _altruist_ selfish?

YES        NO

&#x20; 4\. Does an _introvert_ pay much attention to himself?

YES        NO

&#x20; 5\. Does an _extrovert_ prefer solitude to companionship?

YES        NO

&#x20; 6\. Are most normal people _ambiverts?_

YES        NO

&#x20; 7\. Does a _misanthrope_ like people?

YES        NO

&#x20; 8\. Does a _misogynist_ enjoy the company of women?

YES        NO

&#x20; 9\. Does an _ascetic_ lead a life of luxury?

YES        NO

10\. Does a _misogamist_ try to avoid marriage?

YES        NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–yes, 5–no, 6–yes, 7– no, 8–no, 9–no, 10–yes

***

**Can you recall the words?**

You have thus far reinforced your learning by saying the words aloud, by matching them to their definitions, and by responding to meaning when they were used in context.

Can you recall each word, now, without further reference to previous material? And can you spell it correctly?

&#x20; 1\. Who lives a lonely, austere life?

&#x20; 1\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. Whose interests are turned outward?

&#x20; 2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. Who is supremely selfish?

&#x20; 3\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. Who hates people?

&#x20; 4\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. Whose interests are turned both inward and outward?

&#x20; 5\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6.Who is incredibly conceited?

&#x20; 6\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. Who is more interested in the welfare of others than in his own?

&#x20; 7\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. Who hates women?

&#x20; 8\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. Whose interests are turned inward?

&#x20; 9\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. Who hates marriage?

10\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–ascetic, 2–extrovert, 3–egoist, 4–misanthrope, 5–ambivert, 6–egotist, 7–altruist, 8–misogynist, 9–introvert, 10–misogamist

***

(_End of Session 1_)

### SESSION 2

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

Every word in the English language has a history—and these ten are no exception. In this section you will learn a good deal more about the words you have been working with; in addition, you will make excursions into many other words allied either in meaning, form, or history to our basic ten.

**1. the ego**

_Egoist_ and _egotist_ are built on the same Latin root—the pronoun _ego_, meaning _I. I_ is the greatest concern in the _egoist’s_ mind, the most overused word in the _egotist’s_ vocabulary. (Keep thewords differentiated in your own mind by thinking of the _t_ in _talk_, and the additional _t_ in _egotist._) _Ego_ itself has been taken over from Latin as an important English word and is commonly used to denote one’s concept of oneself, as in, “What do you think your constant criticisms do to my _ego?_” _Ego_ has also a special meaning in psychology—but for the moment you have enough problems without going into _that._

If you are an _egocentric_ (ee′-gō-SEN′-trik), you consider yourself the _center_ of the universe—you are an extreme form of the _egoist._ And if you are an _egomaniac_ (ee′-gō-MAY′-nee-ak), you carry _egoism_ to such an extreme that your needs, desires, and interests have become a morbid obsession, a _mania._ The _egoist_ or _egotist_ is obnoxious, the _egocentric_ is intolerable, and the _egomaniac_ is dangerous and slightly mad.

_Egocentric_ is both a noun (“What an _egocentric_ her new roommate is!”) and an adjective (“He is the most _egocentric_ person I have ever met!”).

To derive the adjective form of _egomaniac_, add -_al_, a common adjective suffix. Say the adjective aloud:

_egomaniacal_      ee′-gō-mƏ-NĪ′-Ə-kƏl

**2. others**

In Latin, the word for _other_ is _alter_, and a number of valuable English words are built on this root.

_Altruism_ (AL′-tr-iz-Əm), the philosophy practiced by _altruists_, comes from one of the variant spellings of Latin _alter_, other. _Altruistic_ (al-tr-IS′-tik) actions look toward the benefit of _others._ If you _alternate_ (AWL′-tƏr-nayt′), you skip one and take the _other_, so to speak, as when you play golf on _alternate_ (AWL′-tƏr-nƏt) Saturdays.

An _alternate_ (AWL′-tƏr-nƏt) in a debate, contest, or convention is the _other_ person who will take over if the original choice is unable to attend. And if you have no _alternative_ (awl-TUR′-nƏ-tiv), you have no _other_ choice.

You see how easy it is to understand the meanings of these words once you realize that they all come from the same source.And keeping in mind that _alter_ means _other_, you can quickly understand words like _alter ego, altercation_, and _alteration._

An _alteration_ (awl′-tƏ-RAY′-shƏn) is of course a change—a making into something _other._ When you _alter_ (AWL′-tƏr) your plans, you make _other_ plans.

An _altercation_ (awl′-tƏr-KAY′-shƏn) is a verbal dispute. When you have an _altercation_ with someone, you have a violent disagreement, a “fight” with words. And why? Because you have _other_ ideas, plans, or opinions than those of the person on the _other_ side of the argument. _Altercation_, by the way, is stronger than _quarrel_ or _dispute_—the sentiment is more heated, the disagreement is likely to be angry or even hot-tempered, there may be recourse, if the disputants are human, to profanity or obscenity. You have _altercations_, in short, over pretty important issues, and the word implies that you get quite excited.

Alter ego (AWL′-tƏr EE′-gō), which combines _alter_, other, with _ego_, I, self, generally refers to someone with whom you are so close that you both do the same things, think alike, react similarly, and are, in temperament, almost mirror images of each other. Any such friend is your _other I_, your _other self_, your _alter ego._

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

Digging a little into the derivation of three of our basic words, _egoist, egotist_, and _altruist_, has put us in touch with two important Latin roots, _ego_, I, self, and _alter_, other, and has made it possible for us to explore, with little difficulty, many other words derived from these roots. Pause now, for a moment, to digest these new acquisitions, and to say them _aloud._

|   1. _ego_                          | EE′-gō              |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------- |
|   2. _egocentric_                   | ee-gō-SEN′-trik     |
|   3. _egomaniac_                    | ee-gō-MAY′-nee-ak   |
|   4. _egomaniacal_                  | ee′-gō-mƏ-NĪ′-Ə-kƏl |
| 5. _altruism_                       | AL′-tr-iz-Əm        |
|   6. _altruistic_                   | al-tr-IS′-tik       |
|   7. to _alternate_ (_v._)          | AWL′-tƏr-nayt′      |
|   8. _alternate_ (_adj._ or _noun_) | AWL′-tƏr-nƏt        |
|   9. _alternative_                  | awl-TUR′-nƏ-tiv     |
| 10. _alteration_                    | awl′-tƏr-AY′-shƏn   |
| 11. to _alter_                      | AWL′-tƏr            |
| 12. _altercation_                   | awl′-tƏr-KAY′-shƏn  |
| 13. _alter ego_                     | AWL′-tƏr EE′-gō     |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

You have seen how these thirteen words derive from the two Latin roots _ego_, I, self, and _alter_, other, and you have pronounced them aloud and thereby begun to make them part of your active vocabulary.

Are you ready to match definitions to words?

| 1. ego            | a. one who is excessively fixated on his own desires, needs, etc. |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. egocentric   | b. to change                                                      |
|   3. altruism     | c. argument                                                       |
|   4. to alternate | d. one’s concept of oneself                                       |
|   5. to alter     | e. to take one, skip one, etc.                                    |
|   6. altercation  | f. philosophy of putting another’s welfare above one’s own        |

***

KEY:  1–d, 2–a, 3–f, 4–e, 5–b, 6–c

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. egomaniacal          | a. a change                                    |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
|   2. altruistic         | b. other possible                              |
|   3. alternative        | c. interested in the welfare of others         |
| 4. alteration           | d. one’s other self                            |
|   5. alter ego          | e. a choice                                    |
|   6. alternate (_adj._) | f. morbidly, obsessively wrapped up in oneself |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–c, 3–e, 4–a, 5–d, 6–b

***

**Do you understand the words?**

If you have begun to understand these thirteen words, you will be able to respond to the following questions.

&#x20; 1\. Is rejection usually a blow to one’s _ego?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Are _egocentric_ people easy to get along with?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Does an _egomaniac_ have a normal personality?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Are _egomaniacal_ tendencies a sign of maturity?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Is _altruism_ a characteristic of selfish people?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Are _altruistic_ tendencies common to egoists?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is an _alternate_ plan necessarily inferior?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Does an _alternative_ allow you some freedom of choice?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Does _alteration_ imply keeping things the same?

YES      NO

10\. Do excitable people often engage in _altercations?_

YES      NO

11\. Is your _alter ego_ usually quite similar to yourself?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–no, 5–no, 6–no, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–no, 10–yes, 11–yes

***

**Can you recall the words?**

Have you learned these words so well that you can summon each one from your mind when a brief definition is offered? Review first if necessary; then, without further reference to previous pages, write the correct word in each blank. Make sure to check your spelling when you refer to the Key.

1\. one’s other self

1\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. to change

2\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. a heated dispute

3\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. excessively, morbidly obsessed with one’s own needs, desires, or ambitions

4\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. unselfish; more interested in the welfare of others than in one’s own

5\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. utterly involved with oneself; self-centered

6\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. a choice

7\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. one who substitutes for another

8\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY: 1–alter ego, 2–alter, 3–altercation, 4–egomaniacal, 5–altruistic, 6–egocentric, 7–alternative, 8–alternate

***

(_End of Session 2_)

### SESSION 3 <a href="#page39" id="page39"></a>

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. depends how you turn**

_Introvert, extrovert_, and _ambivert_ are built on the Latin verb _verto_, to turn. If your thoughts are constantly turned inward (_intro_-), you are an _introvert;_ outward (_extro_-), an _extrovert;_ and in both directions (_ambi_-), an _ambivert._ The prefix _ambi_-, both, is also found in _ambidextrous_ (am′-bƏ-DEKS′-trƏs), _able to use both hands with equal skill._ The noun is _ambidexterity_ (am′-bƏ-deks-TAIR′-Ə-tee).

_Dexterous_ (DEKS′-trƏs) means _skillful_, the noun _dexterity_ (deks-TAIR′-Ə-tee) is _skill._ The ending -_ous_ is a common adjective suffix (_famous, dangerous, perilous_, etc.); -_ity_ is a common noun suffix (_vanity, quality, simplicity_, etc.).

(Spelling caution: Note that the letter following the _t_- in _ambidextrous_ is -_r_, but that in dexterous the next letter is -_e._)

_Dexter_ is actually the Latin word for _right hand_—in the _ambidextrous_ person, both hands are _right hands_, so to speak.

The right hand is traditionally the more skillful one; it is only within recent decades that we have come to accept that “lefties” or “southpaws” are just as normal as anyone else—and the term _left-handed_ is still used as a synonym of _awkward._

The Latin word for the _left hand_ is _sinister._ This same word, in English, means _threatening, evil_, or _dangerous_, a further commentary on our early suspiciousness of left-handed persons. There may still be some parents who insist on forcing left-handed children to change (though left-handedness is inherited, and as much an integral part of its possessor as eye color or nose shape), with various unfortunate results to the child—sometimes stuttering or an inability to read with normal skill.

The French word for the _left hand_ is _gauche_, and, as you would suspect, when we took this word over into English we invested it with an uncomplimentary meaning. Call someone _gauche_ (GŌSH) and you imply clumsiness, generally social rather than physical. (We’re right back to our age-old misconception that left-handed people are less skillful than right-handed ones.) A _gauche_ remark is tactless; a _gauche_ offer of sympathy is so bumbling as to be embarrassing; _gaucherie_ (GŌ′-shƏ-ree) is an awkward, clumsy, tactless, embarrassing way of saying things or of handling situations. The _gauche_ person is totally without finesse.

And the French word for the _right hand_ is _droit_, which we have used in building our English word _adroit_ (Ə-DROYT′). Needless to say, _adroit_, like _dexterous_, means _skillful_, but especially in the exercise of the mental facilities. Like _gauche, adroit_, or its noun _adroitness_, usually is used figuratively. The _adroit_ person is quickwitted, can get out of difficult spots cleverly, can handle situations ingeniously. _Adroitness_ is, then, quite the opposite of _gaucherie._

**2. love, hate, and marriage**

_Misanthrope, misogynist_, and _misogamist_ are built on the Greek root _misein_, to hate. The _misanthrope_ hates mankind (Greek _anthropos_, mankind); the _misogynist_ hates women (Greek _gyne_, woman); the _misogamist_ hates marriage (Greek _gamos_, marriage).

_Anthropos_, mankind, is also found in _anthropology_ (an-thrƏ-POL′-Ə-jee), the study of the development of the human race; and in _philanthropist_ (fƏ-LAN′-thrƏ-pist), one who loves mankind and shows such love by making substantial financial contributions to charitable organizations or by donating time and energy to helping those in need.

The root _gyne_, woman, is also found in _gynecologist_ (gīn-Ə-KOL′-Ə-jist _or_ jīn-KOL′-Ə-jist), the medical specialist who treats female disorders. And the root _gamos_, marriage, occurs also in _monogamy_ (mƏ-NOG′-Ə-mee), _bigamy_ (BIG′-Ə-mee), and _polygamy_ (pƏ-LIG′-Ə-mee).

(As we will discover later, _monos_ means _one, bi_- means _two, polys_ means _many._)

So _monogamy_ is the custom of only _one_ marriage (at a time).

_Bigamy_, by etymology, is _two_ marriages—in actuality, the unlawful act of contracting another marriage without divorcing one’s current legal spouse.

And _polygamy_, by derivation _many_ marriages, and therefore etymologically denoting plural marriage for either males _or_ females, in current usage generally refers to the custom practiced in earlier times by the Mormons, and before them by King Solomon, in which the man has as many wives as he can afford financially and/or emotionally. The correct, but rarely used, term for this custom is _polygyny_ (pƏ-LIJ′-Ə-nee)—_polys_, many, plus _gyne_, woman.

What if a woman has two or more husbands, a form of marriage practiced in the Himalaya Mountains of Tibet? That custom is called _polyandry_ (pol-ee-AN′-dree), from _polys_ plus Greek _andros_, male.

**3. making friends with suffixes**

English words have various forms, using certain suffixes for nouns referring to persons, other suffixes for practices, attitudes, philosophies, etc, and still others for adjectives.

Consider:

| _Person_                            | _Practice, etc._ | _Adjective_                  |
| ----------------------------------- | ---------------- | ---------------------------- |
|   1. misanthrope _or_ misanthropist | misanthropy      | misanthropic                 |
|   2. misogynist                     | misogyny         | misogynous _or_ misogynistic |
|   3. gynecologist                   | gynecology       | gynecological                |
|   4. monogamist                     | monogamy         | monogamous                   |
|   5. bigamist                       | bigamy           | bigamous                     |
|   6. polygamist                     | polygamy         | polygamous                   |
|   7. polygynist                     | polygyny         | polygynous                   |
|   8. polyandrist                    | polyandry        | polyandrous                  |
|   9. philanthropist                 | philanthropy     | philanthropic                |
| 10. anthropologist                  | anthropology     | anthropological              |

You will note, then, that -_ist_ is a common suffix for a person; -_y_ for a practice, attitude, etc.; and -_ic_ or -_ous_ for an adjective.

**4. living alone and liking it**

_Ascetic_ is from the Greek word _asketes_, monk or hermit.

A monk lives a lonely life—not for him the pleasures of the fleshpots, the laughter and merriment of convivial gatherings, the dissipation of high living. Rather, days of contemplation, study, and rough toil, nights on a hard bed in a simple cell, and the kind of self-denial that leads to a purification of the soul.

That person is an _ascetic_ who leads an existence, voluntarily of course, that compares in austerity, simplicity, and rigorous hardship with the life of a monk.

The practice is _asceticism_ (Ə-SET′-Ə-siz-Əm), the adjective _ascetic._

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

Notice how efficiently you can master words by understanding their etymological structure. Stop for a moment to review the roots, prefixes, and suffixes you have studied. Can you recall a word we have discussed in this chapter that is built on the indicated prefix, root, or suffix?

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX | MEANING                                  | EXAMPLE                        |
| -------------------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
|   1. _ego_           | self, I                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   2. _alter_         | other                                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   3. _intro_-        | inside                                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   4. _extro_-        | outside                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   5. _verto_         | turn                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   6. _ambi_-         | both                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   7. _misein_        | hate                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   8. _anthropos_     | mankind                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|   9. _gyne_          | woman                                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 10. _gamos_          | marriage                                 | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 11. _asketes_        | monk                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 12. _centrum_        | center                                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 13. _mania_          | madness                                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 14. _dexter_         | right hand                               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 15. _sinister_       | left hand                                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 16. _gauche_         | left hand                                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 17. _droit_          | right hand                               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 18. _monos_          | one                                      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 19. _bi_-            | two                                      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 20. _polys_          | many                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 21. _andros_         | male                                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 22. -_ist_           | person who (_noun suffix_)               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 23. -_y_             | Practice, custom, etc. (_noun suffix_)   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 24. -_ous_           | adjective suffix                         | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| 25. -_ity_           | quality, condition, etc. (_noun suffix_) | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

Say each word aloud! Hear it in your own voice! _Say it often enough so that you feel comfortable with it, noting carefully from the phonetic respelling exactly how it should sound._

Remember that the first crucial step in mastering a word is to be able to say it with ease and assurance.

|   1. _ambidextrous_   | am-bƏ-DEKS′-trƏs                                          |
| --------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. _ambidexterity_  | am′-bƏ-deks-TAIR′-Ə-tee                                   |
|   3. _dexterous_      | DEKS′-trƏs                                                |
|   4. _dexterity_      | deks-TAIR′-Ə-tee                                          |
|   5. _sinister_       | SIN′-Ə-stƏr                                               |
|   6. _gauche_         | GŌSH (Say the English word _go_, then quickly add -_sh._) |
| 7. _gaucherie_        | GŌ′-shƏ-ree                                               |
|   8. _adroit_         | Ə-DROYT′                                                  |
|   9. _adroitness_     | Ə-DROYT′-nƏss                                             |
| 10. _anthropology_    | an-tbrƏ-POL′-Ə-jee                                        |
| 11. _anthropologist_  | an-thrƏ-POL′-Ə-jist                                       |
| 12. _anthropological_ | an′-thrƏ-pƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl                                    |
| 13. _philanthropist_  | fƏ-LAN′-thrƏ-pist                                         |
| 14. _philanthropy_    | fƏ-LAN′-thrƏ-pee                                          |
| 15. _philanthropic_   | fil-Ən-THROP′-ik                                          |
| 16. _gynecologist_    | gīn (_or_ jin _or_ jīn)-Ə-KOL′-Ə-jist                     |
| 17. _gynecology_      | gīn (or jin _or_ jīn)-Ə-KOL′-Ə-jee                        |
| 18. _gynecological_   | gīn (or jin _or_ jīn)-Ə-kƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl                     |
| 19. _monogamist_      | mƏ-NOG′-Ə-mist                                            |
| 20. _monogamy_        | mƏ-NOG′-Ə-mee                                             |
| 21. _monogamous_      | mƏ-NOG′-Ə-mƏs                                             |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _bigamist_     | BIG′-Ə-mist        |
| ------------------- | ------------------ |
|   2. _bigamy_       | BIG′-Ə-mee         |
|   3. _bigamous_     | BIG′-Ə-mƏs         |
|   4. _polygamist_   | pƏ-LIG′-Ə-mist     |
|   5. _polygamy_     | pƏ-LIG′-Ə-mee      |
|   6. _polygamous_   | pƏ-LIG-′Ə-mƏs      |
|   7. _polygynist_   | pƏ-LIJ′-Ə-nist     |
|   8. _polygyny_     | pƏ-LIJ′-Ə-nee      |
|   9. _polygynous_   | pƏ-LIJ′-Ə-nƏs      |
| 10. _polyandrist_   | pol-ee-AN′-drist   |
| 11. _polyandry_     | pol-ee-AN′-dree    |
| 12. _polyandrous_   | pol-ee-AN′-drƏs    |
| 13. _misanthropist_ | mis-AN′-thrƏ-pist  |
| 14. _misanthropy_   | mis-AN′-thrƏ-pee   |
| 15. _misanthropic_  | mis-Ən-THROP′-ik   |
| 16. _misogyny_      | mƏ-SOJ′-Ə-nee      |
| 17. _misogynous_    | mƏ-SOJ′-Ə-nƏs      |
| 18. _misogynistic_  | mƏ-soj′-Ə-NIS′-tik |
| 19. _misogamy_      | mƏ-SOG′-Ə-mee      |
| 20. _misogamous_    | mƏ-SOG-Ə-mƏs       |
| 21. _asceticism_    | Ə-SET-Ə-siz-Əm     |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

Check on your comprehension! See how successfully you can match words and meanings!

| 1. ambidextrous   | a. evil, threatening                            |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
|   2. dexterous    | b. hating mankind                               |
|   3. sinister     | c. skillful                                     |
|   4. gauche       | d. awkward                                      |
|   5. misanthropic | e. capable of using both hands with equal skill |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–c, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. anthropology | a. system of only one marriage    |
| --------------- | --------------------------------- |
|   2. gynecology | b. hatred of women                |
|   3. monogamy   | c. illegal plurality of marriages |
|   4. bigamy     | d. study of human development     |
|   5. misogyny   | e. study of female ailments       |

***

KEY:  1–d, 2–e, 3–a, 4–c, 5–b

***

**Can you work with the words? (III)**

| 1. polygamy       | a. devotion to a lonely and austere life  |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
|   2. misogamy     | b. skill, cleverness                      |
|   3. asceticism   | c. custom in which one man has many wives |
|   4. philanthropy | d. love of mankind                        |
|   5. adroitness   | e. hatred of marriage                     |

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–e, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

***

**Can you work with the words? (IV)**

| 1. polygynist       | a. student of the development of mankind |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
|   2. polyandrist    | b. one who engages in charitable works   |
|   3. anthropologist | c. male with a plurality of wives        |
|   4. gynecologist   | d. women’s doctor                        |
|   5. philanthropist | e. female with a plurality of husbands   |

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–e, 3–a, 4–d, 5–b

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Can _ambidextrous_ people use either the left or right hand equally well?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Should a surgeon be manually _dexterous?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Is a _sinister_-looking person frightening?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Is _gaucherie_ a social asset?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Is an _adroit_ speaker likely to be a successful lawyer?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Is a student of _anthropology_ interested in primitive tribes?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Does a _gynecologist_ have more male than female patients?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is _monogamy_ the custom in Western countries?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Is a _misogamist_ likely to show tendencies toward _polygamy?_

YES      NO

10\. Is a _bigamist_ breaking the law?

YES      NO

11\. Is a _philanthropist_ generally altruistic?

YES      NO

12\. Does a _misanthropist_ enjoy human relationships?

YES      NO

13\. Does a _misogynist_ enjoy female companionship?

YES      NO

14.Are unmarried people necessarily _misogamous?_

YES      NO

15\. Are bachelors necessarily _misogynous?_

YES      NO

16\. Is _asceticism_ compatible with luxurious living and the pursuit of pleasure?

YES      NO

17\. Does a _polyandrist_ have more than one husband?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–yes, 3–yes, 4–no, 5–yes, 6–yes, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–no, 10–yes, 11–yes, 12–no, 13–no, 14–no, 15–no, 16–no, 17–yes

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. philosophy of living austerely

&#x20; 1\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. hatred of women

&#x20; 2\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. hatred of marriage

&#x20; 3\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. hatred of mankind

&#x20; 4\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. skillful

&#x20; 5\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. awkward

&#x20; 6\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. evil, threatening

&#x20; 7\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. describing hatred of women (_adj._)

&#x20; 8\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. skill

&#x20; 9\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. pertaining to hatred of marriage. (_adj._)

10\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. pertaining to hatred of mankind (_adj._)

11\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. social custom of plural marriage

12\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. unlawful state of having more than one spouse

13\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. doctor specializing in female disorders

14\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. custom of one marriage at a time

15\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16.one who hates the human race

16\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17\. able to use both hands with equal skill

17\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

18\. study of mankind

18\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

19\. one who loves mankind

19\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

20\. skill in the use of both hands

20\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–asceticism, 2–misogyny, 3–misogamy, 4–misanthropy, 5–dexterous, 6–gauche, 7–sinister, 8–misogynous or misogynistic, 9–adroitness, 10–misogamous, 11–misanthropic, 12–polygamy, polyandry, _or_ polygyny, 13–bigamy, 14–gynecologist, 15–monogamy, 16–misanthropist _or_ misanthrope, 17–ambidextrous, 18–anthropology, 19–philanthropist, 20–ambidexterity

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

1\. Puts selfish desires first: (a) egoist, (b) egotist, (c) altruist

2\. Is self-analytical: (a) extrovert, (b) introvert, (c) ambivert

3\. Hates women: (a) misogamist, (b) misanthrope, (c) misogynist

4\. One’s other self: (a) altercation, (b) alter ego, (c) alteration

5\. Awkward, clumsy: (a) adroit, (b) dexterous, (c) gauche

6\. Plural marriage as a custom: (a) bigamy, (b) polygamy, (c) monogamy

7\. Study of human development: (a) asceticism, (b) philanthropy, (c) anthropology

8\. Plurality of husbands as a custom: (a) misogyny, (b) polygyny, (c) polyandry

***

KEY:  1–a, 2–b, 3–c, 4–b, 5–c, 6–b, 7–c, 8–c

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| ROOT                     | MEANING                |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------- |
|   1. _ego_               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   egoist         |                        |
|   2. _alter_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   alternative    |                        |
|   3. _verto_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   introvert      |                        |
|   4. _misein_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   misogynist     |                        |
|   5. _anthropos_         | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   anthropologist |                        |
|   6. _gyne_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   gynecologist   |                        |
|   7. _gamos_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   bigamy         |                        |
|   8. _centrum_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   egocentric     |                        |
|   9. _dexter_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   dexterous      |                        |
| 10. _droit_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   adroit         |                        |
| 11. _monos_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   monogamy       |                        |
| 12. _andros_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   polyandry      |                        |

***

KEY:  1–self, 2–other, 3–to turn, 4–to hate, 5–mankind, 6–woman, 7–marriage, 8–center, 9–right hand, 10–right hand, 11–one, 12–male

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST

Suppose you met the following words in your reading. Recognizing the roots on which they are constructed, could you figure out the meanings? Write your answers on the blank lines.

&#x20; 1\. _anthropocentric:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. _andromania:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. _gynandrous:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. _monomania:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. _misandrist:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

(_Answers in Chapter 18._)

#### STICK TO YOUR TIME SCHEDULE! <a href="#page50" id="page50"></a>

In three sessions, you have become acquainted with scores of new, vital, exciting words. You understand the ideas behind these words, their various forms and spellings, their pronunciation, their derivation, how they can be used, and exactly what they mean. I do not wish to press a point unduly, but it is possible that you have learned more new words in the short time it took you to cover this chapter than the average adult learns in an entire year. This realization should make you feel both gratified and excited.

Funny thing about time. Aside from the fact that we all, rich or poor, sick or well, have the same amount of time, exactly twenty-four hours every day (that is looking at time from a static point of view), it is also true that we can always find time for the things we enjoy doing, almost never for the things we find unpleasant (and that is looking at time from the dynamic point of view). I am not merely being philosophical—I am sure you will agree with this concept if you give it a little thought.

If you have enjoyed learning new words, accepting new challenges, gaining new understanding, and discovering the thrill of successful accomplishment, then make sure to stay with the time schedule you have set up for yourself.

_A crucial factor in successful, ongoing learning is routine._

Develop a comfortable time routine, persevere against all distractions, and you will learn anything you sincerely want to learn.

So, to give yourself an edge, write here the day and hour you plan to return to your work:

&#x20;DAY: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
DATE: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
TIME: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

(_End of Session 3_)

***

<sup>1</sup> See Introduction, Section 2, _Master the pronunciation system._
