# 5

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT VARIOUS PRACTITIONERS

## (_Sessions 7–10_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What practitioner:

• _is a student of human behavior?_

• _follows the techniques devised by Sigmund Freud?_

• _straightens teeth?_

• _measures vision?_

• _grinds lenses?_

• _treats minor ailments of the feet?_

• _analyzes handwriting?_

• _deals with the problems of aging?_

• _uses manipulation and massage as curative techniques?_

***

### SESSION 7 <a href="#page82" id="page82"></a>

An ancient Greek mused about the meaning of life, and _philosophy_ was born. The first Roman decided to build a road instead of cutting a path through the jungle, and _engineering_ came into existence. One day in primitive times, a human being lent to another whatever then passed for money and got back his original investment plus a little more—and _banking_ had started.

Most people spend part of every workday at some gainful employment, honest or otherwise, and in so doing often contribute their little mite to the progress of the world.

We explore in this chapter the ideas behind people’s occupations—and the words that translate these ideas into verbal symbols.

#### IDEAS

**1. behavior**

By education and training, this practitioner is an expert in the dark mysteries of human behavior—what makes people act as they do, why they have certain feelings, how their personalities were formed—in short, what makes them tick. Such a professional is often employed by industries, schools, and institutions to devise means for keeping workers productive and happy, students well-adjusted, and inmates contented. With a state license, this person may also do private or group therapy.

A _psychologist_

**2. worries, fears, conflicts**

This practitioner is a physician, psychiatrist, or psychologist who has been specially trained in the techniques devised by SigmundFreud, encouraging you to delve into that part of your mind called “the unconscious.” By reviewing the experiences, traumas, feelings, and thoughts of your earlier years, you come to a better understanding of your present worries, fears, conflicts, repressions, insecurities, and nervous tensions—thus taking the first step in coping with them. Treatment, consisting largely in listening to, and helping you to interpret the meaning of, your free-flowing ideas, is usually given in frequent sessions that may well go on for a year or more.

A _psychoanalyst_

**3. teeth**

This practitioner is a dentist who has taken postgraduate work in the straightening of teeth.

An _orthodontist_

**4. eyes**

This practitioner measures your vision and prescribes the type of glasses that will give you a new and more accurate view of the world.

An _optometrist_

**5. glasses**

This practitioner grinds lenses according to the specifications prescribed by your optometrist or ophthalmologist, and may also deal in other kinds of optical goods.

An _optician_

**6. bones and blood vessels**

This practitioner is a member of the profession that originated in 1874, when Andrew T. Still devised a drugless technique of curing diseases by massage and other manipulative procedures, a technique based on the theory that illness may be caused by the undue pressure of displaced bones on nerves and blood vessels.

Training is equal to that of physicians, and in most states these practitioners may also use the same methods as, and have the full rights and privileges of, medical doctors.

An _osteopath_

**7. joints and articulations**

The basic principle of this practitioner’s work is the maintenance of the structural and functional integrity of the nervous system. Treatment consists of manipulating most of the articulations of the body, especially those connected to the spinal column. Licensed and legally recognized in forty-five states, this professional has pursued academic studies and training that parallel those of the major healing professions.

A _chiropractor_

**8. feet**

This practitioner treats minor foot ailments—corns, calluses, bunions, fallen arches, etc., and may perform minor surgery.

A _podiatrist_

**9. writing**

This practitioner analyzes handwriting to determine character, personality, or aptitudes, and is often called upon to verify the authenticity of signatures, written documents, etc.

A _graphologist_

**10. getting old**

This social scientist deals with the financial, economic, sexual, social, retirement, and other non-medical problems of the elderly.

A _gerontologist_

#### USING THE WORDS <a href="#page85" id="page85"></a>

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _psychologist_  | sī-KOL′-Ə-jist       |
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
|   2. _psychoanalyst_ | sī-kō-AN′-Ə-list     |
|   3. _orthodontist_  | awr-thƏ-DON′-tist    |
|   4. _optometrist_   | op-TOM′-Ə-trist      |
|   5. _optician_      | op-TISH′-Ən          |
|   6. _osteopath_     | OS′-tee-Ə-path       |
|   7. _chiropractor_  | KĪ′-rƏ-prƏk′-tƏr     |
|   8. _podiatrist_    | pƏ-DĪ′-Ə-trist       |
|   9. _graphologist_  | graf-OL′-Ə-jist      |
| 10. _gerontologist_  | jair′-Ən-TOL′-Ə-jist |

**Can you work with the words?**

| PRACTITIONERS      | INTERESTS                         |
| ------------------ | --------------------------------- |
|   1. psychologist  | a. vision                         |
|   2. psychoanalyst | b. “the unconscious”              |
|   3. orthodontist  | c. bones and blood vessels        |
|   4. optometrist   | d. lenses and optical instruments |
|   5. optician      | e. feet                           |
|   6. osteopath     | f. teeth                          |
|   7. chiropractor  | g. problems of aging              |
|   8. podiatrist    | h. joints of the spine            |
|   9. graphologist  | i. handwriting                    |
| 10. gerontologist  | j. behavior                       |

***

KEY:  1–j, 2–b, 3–f, 4–a, 5–d, 6–c, 7–h, 8–e, 9–i, 10–g

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. A _psychologist_ must also be a physician.

TRUE      FALSE

2\. A _psychoanalyst_ follows Freudian techniques.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. An _orthodontist_ specializes in straightening teeth.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. An _optometrist_ prescribes and fits glasses.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. An _optician_ may prescribe glasses.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. An _osteopath_ may use massage and other manipulative techniques.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. A _chiropractor_ has a medical degree.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 8\. A _podiatrist_ may perform major surgery.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 9\. A _graphologist_ analyzes character from handwriting.

TRUE      FALSE

10\. A _gerontologist_ is interested in the non-medical problems of adolescence.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–T, 3–T, 4–T, 5–F, 6–T, 7–F, 8–F, 9–T, 10–F

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. delves into the unconscious

&#x20; 1\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. uses either massage and manipulation or other standard medical procedures to treat illness

&#x20; 2\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. takes care of minor ailments of the feet

&#x20; 3\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. straightens teeth

&#x20; 4\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. analyzes handwriting

&#x20; 5\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. grinds lenses and sells optical goods

&#x20; 6\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. deals with the non-medical problems of aging

&#x20; 7\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. manipulates articulations connected to the spinal column

&#x20; 8\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

9\. studies and explains human behavior

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. measures vision and prescribes glasses

10\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–psychoanalyst, 2–osteopath, 3–podiatrist, 4–orthodontist, 5–graphologist, 6–optician, 7–gerontologist, 8–chiropractor, 9–psychologist, 10–optometrist

***

(_End of Session_ 7)

### SESSION 8

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. the mental life**

_Psychologist_ is built upon the same Greek root as _psychiatrist—psyche_, spirit, soul, or mind. In _psychiatrist_, the combining form is _iatreia_, medical healing. In _psychologist_, the combining form is _logos_, science or study; a _psychologist_, by etymology, is one who studies the mind.

The field is _psychology_ (sī-KOL′-Ə-jee), the adjective _psychological_ (sī′-kƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl).

_Psyche_ (SĪ′-kee) is also an English word in its own right—it designates the mental life, the spiritual or non-physical aspect of one’s existence. The adjective _psychic_ (SĪ′-kik) refers to phenomena or qualities that cannot be explained in purely physical terms. People may be called _psychic_ if they seem to possess a sixth sense, a special gift of mind reading, or any mysterious aptitudes that cannot be accounted for logically. A person’s disturbance is _psychic_ if it is emotional or mental, rather than physical.

_Psyche_ combines with the Greek _pathos_, suffering or disease, to form _psychopathic_ (sī-kƏ-PATH′-ik), an adjective that describes someone suffering from a severe mental or emotional disorder. The noun is _psychopathy_ (sī′-KOP′-Ə-thee).<sup>1</sup>

The root _psyche_ combines with Greek _soma_, body, to form _psychosomatic_ (sī′-kō-sƏ-MAT′-ik), an adjective that delineates the powerful influence that the mind, especially the unconscious, has on bodily diseases. Thus, a person who fears the consequence of being present at a certain meeting will suddenly develop a bad cold or backache, or even be injured in a traffic accident, so that his appearance at this meeting is made impossible. It’s a real cold, it’s far from an imaginary backache, and of course one cannot in any sense doubt the reality of the automobile that injured him. Yet, according to the _psychosomatic_ theory of medicine, his unconscious made him susceptible to the cold germs, caused the backache, or forced him into the path of the car.

A _psychosomatic_ disorder actually exists insofar as symptoms are concerned (headache, excessive urination, pains, paralysis, heart palpitations), yet there is no organic cause within the body. The cause is within the _psyche_, the mind. Dr. Flanders Dunbar, in _Mind and Body_, gives a clear and exciting account of the interrelationship between emotions and diseases.

_Psychoanalysis_ (sī′-kō-Ə-NAL′-Ə-sis) relies on the technique of deeply, exhaustively probing into the unconscious, a technique developed by Sigmund Freud. In oversimplified terms, the general principle of _psychoanalysis_ is to guide the patient to an awareness of the deep-seated, unconscious causes of anxieties, fears, conflicts, and tension. Once found, exposed to the light of day, and thoroughly understood, claim the _psychoanalysts_, these causes may vanish like a light snow that is exposed to strong sunlight.

Consider an example: You have asthma, let us say, and your doctor can find no physical basis for your ailment. So you are referred to a _psychoanalyst_ (or _psychiatrist_ or clinical _psychologist_ who practices _psychoanalytically_ oriented therapy).

With your therapist you explore your past life, dig into your unconscious, and discover, let us say for the sake of argument, that your mother or father always used to set for you impossibly high goals. No matter what you accomplished in school, it was not good enough—in your mother’s or father’s opinion (and such opinions were always made painfully clear to you), you could do better if you were not so lazy. As a child you built up certain resentments and anxieties because you seemed unable to please your parent—and (this will sound farfetched, but it is perfectly possible) as a result you became asthmatic. How else were you going to get the parental love, the approbation, the attention you needed and that you felt you were not receiving?

In your sessions with your therapist, you discover that your asthma is emotionally, rather than organically, based—your ailment is _psychogenic_ (sī′-kō-JEN′-ik), of _psychic_ origin, or (the terms are used more or less interchangeably although they differ somewhat in definition) _psychosomatic_, resulting from the interaction of mind and body. (_Psychogenic_ is built on _psyche_ plus Greek _genesis_, birth or origin.)

And your treatment? No drugs, no surgery—these may help the body, not the emotions. Instead, you “work out” (this is the term used in _psychoanalytic_ \[sī-kō-an′-Ə-LIT′-ik] parlance) early trauma in talk, in remembering, in exploring, in interpreting, in reliving childhood experiences. And if your asthma is indeed _psychogenic_ (or _psychosomatic_), therapy will very likely help you; your attacks may cease, either gradually or suddenly.

Freudian therapy is less popular today than formerly; many newer therapies—Gestalt, bioenergetics, transactional analysis, to name only a few—claim to produce quicker results.

In any case, _psychotherapy_ (sī-kō-THAIR′-Ə-pee) of one sort or another is the indicated treatment for _psychogenic_ (or _psychosomatic_) disorders, or for any personality disturbances. The practitioner is a _psychotherapist_ (sī-kō-THAIR′-Ə-pist) or _therapist_, for short; the adjective is _psychotherapeutic_ (sī-kō-thair′-Ə-PY′-tik).

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY <a href="#page90" id="page90"></a>

| ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING            |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
|   1. _psyche_                             | spirit, soul, mind |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |
|   2. _iatreia_                            | medical healing    |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |
|   3. -_ic_                                | adjective suffix   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |
|   4. _soma_                               | body               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |
|   5. _genesis_                            | birth, origin      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |
|   6. _pathos_                             | suffering, disease |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                    |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _psychology_       | sī-KOL′-Ə-jee          |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   2. _psychological_    | sī′-kƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl      |
|   3. _psyche_           | SĪ′-kee                |
|   4. _psychic_          | SĪ′-kik                |
|   5. _psychopathic_     | sī-kƏ-PATH′-ik         |
|   6. _psychopathy_      | sī-KOP′-Ə-thee         |
|   7. _psychopath_       | SĪ′-kƏ-path            |
|   8. _psychosomatic_    | sī′-kō-sƏ-MAT′-ik      |
|   9. _psychoanalysis_   | sī′-kō-Ə-NAL′-Ə-sis    |
| 10. _psychoanalytic_    | sī-kō-an′-Ə-LIT′-ik    |
| 11. _psychogenic_       | sī-kō-JEN′-ik          |
| 12. _psychotherapy_     | sī-kō-THAIR′-Ə-pee     |
| 13. _psychotherapist_   | sī-kō-THAIR′-Ə-pist    |
| 14. _psychotherapeutic_ | sī-kō-thair′-Ə-PY′-tik |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. psychology       | a. mental or emotional disturbance                      |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. psyche           | b. psychological treatment based on Freudian techniques |
|   3. psychic        | c. general term for psychological treatment             |
|   4. psychopathy    | d. originating in the mind or emotions                  |
|   5. psychosomatic  | e. one’s inner or mental life, or self-image            |
|   6. psychoanalysis | f. study of the human mind and behavior                 |
|   7. psychogenic    | g. describing the interaction of mind and body          |
|   8. psychotherapy  | h. pertaining to the mind; extrasensory                 |
|   9. psychopath     | i. person lacking in social conscience or inner censor  |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–e, 3–h, 4–a, 5–g, 6–b, 7–d, 8–c, 9–i

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. _Psychological_ treatment aims at sharpening the intellect.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 2\. _Psychic_ phenomena can be explained on rational or physical grounds

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. _Psychopathic_ personalities are normal and healthy.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. A _psychosomatic_ symptom is caused by organic disease.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. Every therapist uses _psychoanalysis._

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. A _psychogenic_ illness originates in the mind or emotions.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. A _psychotherapist_ must have a medical degree.

TRUE      FALSE

8\. _Psychoanalytically_ oriented therapy uses Freudian techniques.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 9\. A _psychopath_ is often a criminal.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–F, 3–F, 4–F, 5–F, 6–T, 7–F, 8–T, 9–T

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. one’s inner or mental life, or self-image

&#x20; 1\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. the adjective that denotes the interactions, especially in illness, between mind and body

&#x20; 2\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. mentally or emotionally disturbed

&#x20; 3\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. study of behavior

&#x20; 4\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. extrasensory

&#x20; 5\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. treatment by Freudian techniques

&#x20; 6\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. pertaining to the study of behavior (_adj._)

&#x20; 7\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. of mental or emotional origin

&#x20; 8\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. general term for treatment of emotional disorders

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. antisocial person

10\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1-psyche, 2–psychosomatic, 3–psychopathic, 4–psychology, 5–psychic, 6–psychoanalysis, 7–psychological, 8–psychogenic, 9–psychotherapy, 10–psychopath

***

(_End of Session 8_)

### SESSION 9 <a href="#page93" id="page93"></a>

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. the whole tooth**

_Orthodontist_, as we discovered in Chapter 4, is built on _orthos_, straight, correct, plus _odontos_, tooth.

A _pedodontist_ (pee′-dō-DON′-tist) specializes in the care of children’s teeth—the title is constructed from _paidos_, child, plus _odontos._ The specialty: _pedodontia_ (pee′-dō-DON′-sha); the adjective: _pedodontic_ (pee′-dō-DON′-tik).

A _periodontist_ (pair′-ee-ō-DON′-tist) is a gum specialist—the term combines _odontos_ with the prefix _peri_-, around, surrounding. (As a quick glance in the mirror will tell you, the gums surround the teeth, more or less.)

Can you figure out the word for the specialty? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

For the adjective? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

An _endodontist_ (en′-dō-DON′-tist) specializes in work on the pulp of the tooth and in root-canal therapy—the prefix in this term is _endo_-, from Greek _endon_, inner, within.

Try your hand again at constructing words. What is the specialty? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. And the adjective? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The prefix _ex_-, out, combines with _odontos_ to form _exodontist_ (eks′-ō-DON′-tist). What do you suppose, therefore, is the work in which this practitioner specializes? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

And the term for the specialty? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

For the adjective? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**2. measurement**

The _optometrist_, by etymology, measures vision—the term is built on _opsis, optikos_, view, vision, plus _metron_, measurement.

_Metron_ is the root in many other words:

1\. _thermometer_ (thƏr-MOM′-Ə-tƏr)—an instrument to measure heat (Greek _therme_, heat).

2\. _barometer_ (bƏ-ROM′-Ə-ter)—an instrument to measure atmospheric pressure (Greek _baros_, weight); the adjective is _barometric_ (bair′-Ə-MET′-rik).

3\. _sphygmomanometer_ (sfig′-mō-mƏ-NOM′-Ə-tƏr)—a device for measuring blood pressure (Greek _sphygmos_, pulse).

4\. _metric_ system—a decimal system of weights and measures, long used in other countries and now gradually being adopted in the United States.

**3. bones, feet, and hands**

_Osteopath_ combines Greek _osteon_, bone, with _pathos_, suffering, disease. _Osteopathy_ (os′-tee-OP′-Ə-thee), you will recall, was originally based on the theory that disease is caused by pressure of the bones on blood vessels and nerves. An _osteopathic_ (os′-tee-Ə-PATH′-ik) physician is _not_ a bone specialist, despite the misleading etymology—and should not be confused with the _orthopedist_, who is.

The _podiatrist_ (Greek _pous, podos_, foot, plus _iatreia_, medical healing) practices _podiatry_ (pƏ-DĪ′-Ə-tree). The adjective is _podiatric_ (pō′-dee-AT′-rik).

The root _pous, podos_ is found also in:

1\. _octopus_ (OK′-tƏ-pƏs), the eight-armed (or, as the etymology has it, eight-footed) sea creature (Greek _okto_, eight).

2\. _platypus_ (PLAT′-Ə-pƏs), the strange water mammal with a duck’s bill, webbed feet, and a beaver-like tail that reproduces by laying eggs (Greek _platys_, broad, flat—hence, by etymology, a flatfoot!).

3\. _podium_ (PŌ′-dee-Əm), a speaker’s platform, etymologically a place for the feet. (The suffix -_ium_ often signifies “place where,” as in _gymnasium, stadium, auditorium_, etc.)

4\. _tripod_ (TRĪ′-pod), a three-legged (or “footed”) stand for a camera or other device (_tri_-, three).

5\. _chiropodist_ (kƏ-ROP′-Ə-dist), earlier title for a _podiatrist_, and still often used. The specialty is _chiropody_ (kƏ-ROP′-Ə-dee).

_Chiropody_ combines _podos_ with Greek _cheir_, hand, spelled _chiro_- in English words. The term was coined in the days before labor-saving machinery and push-button devices, when people worked with their hands and developed calluses on their upper extremities as well as on their feet. Today most of us earn a livelihood in more sedentary occupations, and so we may develop calluses on less visible portions of our anatomy.

_Chiropractors_ heal with their hands—the specialty is _chiropractic_ (kī′-rō-PRAK′-tik).

_Cheir_ (_chiro_-), hand, is the root in _chirography_ (kī-ROG′-rƏ-fee). Recalling the _graph_- in _graphologist_, can you figure out by etymology what _chirography_ is? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

An expert in writing by hand, or in penmanship (a lost art in these days of electronic word-processing),<sup>2</sup> would be a _chirographer_ (kī-ROG′-rƏ-fƏr); the adjective is _chirographic_ (kī′-rō-GRAF′-ik).

If the suffix -_mancy_ comes from a Greek word meaning _foretelling_ or _prediction_, can you decide what _chiromancy_ (KĪ′-rō-man′-see) must be? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The person who practices _chiromancy_ is a _chiromancer_ (KĪ′-rō-man′-sƏr); the adjective is _chiromantic_ (kī′-rō-MAN′-tik).

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                      | MEANING             |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
|   1. _orthos_                             | straight, correct   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   2. _odontos_                            | tooth               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   3. _paidos_ (_ped_-)                    | child               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   4. -_ic_                                | adjective suffix    |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   5. _peri_-                              | around, surrounding |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   6. _endo_-                              | inner, within       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 7. _ex_-                                  | out                 |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   8. _opsis, optikos_                     | vision              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
|   9. _metron_                             | measurement         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 10. _therme_                              | heat                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 11. _baros_                               | weight              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 12. _sphygmos_                            | pulse               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 13. _osteon_                              | bone                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 14. _pathos_                              | suffering, disease  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 15. _pous, podos_                         | foot                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 16. _okto_                                | eight               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 17. _platys_                              | broad, flat         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 18. -_ium_                                | place where         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 19. _tri_-                                | three               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 20. _cheir_ (_chiro_-)                    | hand                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 21. _mancy_                               | prediction          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |
| 22. _iatreia_                             | medical healing     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                     |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _pedodontist_     | pee′-dō-DON′-tist      |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   2. _pedodontia_      | pee′-dō-DON′-shƏ       |
|   3. _pedodontic_      | pee′-dō-DON′-tik       |
|   4. _periodontist_    | pair′-ee-ō-DON′-tist   |
|   5. _periodontia_     | pair′-ee-ō-DON′-shƏ    |
|   6. _periodontic_     | pair′-ee-ō-DON′-tik    |
|   7. _endodontist_     | en′-dō-DON′-tist       |
|   8. _endodontia_      | en′-dō-DON′-shƏ        |
|   9. _endodontic_      | en′-dō-DON′-tik        |
| 10. _exodontist_       | eks′-ō-DON′-tist       |
| 11. _exodontia_        | eks′-ō-DON′-shƏ        |
| 12. _exodontic_        | eks′-ō-DON′-tik        |
| 13. _thermometer_      | thƏr-MOM′-Ə-tƏr        |
| 14. _barometer_        | bƏ-ROM′-Ə-tƏr          |
| 15. _barometric_       | bair′-Ə-MET′-rik       |
| 16. _sphygmomanometer_ | sfig′-mō-mƏ-NOM′-Ə-tƏr |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _osteopathy_  | os′-tee-OP′-Ə-thee |
| ------------------ | ------------------ |
|   2. _osteopathic_ | os′-tee-Ə-PATH′-ik |
|   3. _podiatry_    | pƏ-DĪ′-Ə-tree      |
|   4. _podiatric_   | pō′-dee-AT′-rik    |
|   5. _octopus_     | OK′-tƏ-pƏs         |
|   6. _platypus_    | PLAT′-Ə-pƏs        |
|   7. _podium_      | PŌ′-dee-Əm         |
|   8. _tripod_      | TRĪ′-pod           |
|   9. _chiropodist_ | kƏ-ROP′-Ə-dist     |
| 10. _chiropody_    | kƏ-ROP′-Ə-dee      |
| 11. _chiropractic_ | kī′-rō-PRAK′-tik   |
| 12. _chirography_  | kī-ROG′-rƏ-fee     |
| 13. _chirographer_ | kī-ROG′-rƏ-fƏr     |
| 14. _chirographic_ | kī′-rƏ-GRAF′-ik    |
| 15. _chiromancy_   | KĪ′-rƏ-man′-see    |
| 16. _chiromancer_  | KĪ′-rƏ-man′-sƏr    |
| 17. _chiromantic_  | kī′-rƏ-MAN′-tik    |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. orthodontia        | a. dental specialty involving the pulp and root canal                                                         |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. pedodontia       | b. instrument that measures atmospheric pressure                                                              |
|   3. periodontia      | c. specialty arising from the theory that pressure of the bones on nerves and blood vessels may cause disease |
|   4. endodontia       | d. specialty of child dentistry                                                                               |
|   5. exodontia        | e. blood-pressure apparatus                                                                                   |
|   6. barometer        | f. treatment of minor ailments of the foot                                                                    |
|   7. sphygmomanometer | g. instrument to measure heat                                                                                 |
|   8. osteopathy       | h. specialty of tooth extraction                                                                              |
|   9. podiatry         | i. specialty of tooth straightening                                                                           |
| 10. thermometer       | j. specialty of the gums                                                                                      |

***

KEY:  1–i, 2–d, 3–j, 4–a, 5–h, 6–b, 7–e, 8–c, 9–f, 10–g

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. octopus        | a. speaker’s platform                                                         |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. platypus     | b. maintenance of integrity of the nervous system by manipulation and massage |
|   3. podium       | c. palm reading                                                               |
|   4. chiropody    | d. eight-armed sea creature                                                   |
|   5. chiropractic | e. handwriting                                                                |
|   6. chirography  | f. treatment of minor ailments of the foot                                    |
|   7. chiromancy   | g. egg-laying mammal with webbed feet                                         |

***

KEY:  1–d, 2–g, 3–a, 4–f, 5–b, 6–e, 7–c

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. _Orthodontia_ is a branch of dentistry.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 2\. Doctors use _sphygmomanometers_ to check blood pressure.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. _Osteopathic_ physicians may use standard medical procedures.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. _Chiropractic_ deals with handwriting.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. _Chiropody_ and _podiatry_ are synonymous terms.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. A _podium_ is a place from which a lecture might be delivered.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. A _pedodontist_ is a foot doctor.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 8\. A _periodontist_ is a gum specialist.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 9\. A _endodontist_ does root-canal therapy.

TRUE      FALSE

10\. An _exodontist_ extracts teeth.

TRUE      FALSE

11\. A _barometer_ measures heat.

TRUE      FALSE

12\. An _octopus_ has eight arms.

TRUE      FALSE

13\. A _platypus_ is a land mammal.

TRUE      FALSE

14\. A _tripod_ has four legs.

TRUE      FALSE

15\. A _chirographer_ is an expert at penmanship.

TRUE      FALSE

16\. A _chiromancer_ reads palms.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–T, 2–T, 3–T, 4–F, 5–T, 6–T, 7–F, 8–T, 9–T, 10–T, 11–F, 12–T, 13–F, 14–F, 15–T, 16–T

***

**Do you recall the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. pertaining to child dentistry (_adj._)

&#x20; 1\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. pertaining to treatment of the foot (_adj._)

&#x20; 2\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. blood-pressure apparatus

&#x20; 3\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. three-legged stand

&#x20; 4\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. pertaining to the treatment of diseases by manipulation to relieve pressure of the bones on nerves and blood vessels (_adj._)

&#x20; 5\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. pertaining to handwriting (_adj._)

&#x20; 6\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. gum specialist

&#x20; 7\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. treatment of ailments of the foot

&#x20; 8\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ _or_ C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. stand for a speaker

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. dentist specializing in treating the pulp of the tooth or in doing root-canal therapy

10\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–pedodontic, 2–podiatric, 3–sphygmomanometer, 4–tripod, 5–osteopathic, 6–chirographic, 7–periodontist, 8–podiatry _or_ chiropody, 9–podium, 10–endodontist

***

**Can you recall the words? (II)**

1\. pertaining to the specialty of tooth extraction (_adj._)

1\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. pertaining to the measurement of atmospheric pressure (_adj._)

2\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. palm reading (_noun_)

3\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. handwriting

4\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. the practice of manipulating bodily articulations to relieve ailments

5\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. egg-laying mammal

6\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. eight-armed sea creature

7\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

8\. instrument to measure heat

8\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–exodontic, 2–barometric, 3–chiromancy, 4–chirography, 5–chiropractic, 6–platypus, 7–octopus, 8–thermometer

***

(_End of Session 9_)

### SESSION 10

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. writing and writers**

The Greek verb _graphein_, to write, is the source of a great many English words.

We know that the _graphologist_ analyzes handwriting, the term combining _graphein_ with _logos_, science, study. The specialty is _graphology_ (grƏ-FOL′-Ə-jee), the adjective _graphological_ (graf′-Ə-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl).

_Chirographer_ is built on _graphein_ plus _cheir_ (_chiro_-), hand.Though _chirography_ may be a lost art, _calligraphy_ (kƏ-LIG′-rƏ-fee) is enjoying a revival. For centuries before the advent of printing, _calligraphy_, or penmanship as an artistic expression, was practiced by monks.

A _calligrapher_ (kƏ-LIG′-rƏ-fƏr) is called upon to design and write announcements, place cards, etc., as a touch of elegance. The adjective is _calligraphic_ (kal′-Ə-GRAF′-ik).

_Calligraphy_ combines _graphein_ with Greek _kallos_,<sup>3</sup> beauty, and so, by etymology, means _beautiful writing._

If a word exists for artistic handwriting, there must be one for the opposite—bad, scrawly, or illegible handwriting. And indeed there is—_cacography_ (kƏ-KOG′-rƏ-fee), combining _graphein_ with Greek _kakos_, bad, harsh.

By analogy with the forms of _calligraphy_, can you write the word for:

One who uses bad or illegible handwriting?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Pertaining to, or marked by, bad handwriting (_adjective_)?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

_Graphein_ is found in other English words:

1\. _cardiograph_ (discussed in Chapter 4)—etymologically a “heart writer” (_kardia_, heart).

2\. _photograph_—etymologically, “written by light” (Greek _photos_, light).

3\. _phonograph_—etymologically, a “sound writer” (Greek _phone_, sound).

4\. _telegraph_—etymologically a “distance writer” (Greek _tele_-, distance).

5\. _biography_—etymologically “life writing” (Greek, _bios_, life). (Many of these new roots will be discussed in greater detail in later chapters.)

**2. aging and the old**

We know that a _geriatrician_ specializes in the medical care of the elderly. The Greek word _geras_, old age, has a derived form, _geron_, old man, the root in _gerontologist._ The specialty is _gerontology_ (jair′-Ən-TOL′-Ə-jee), the adjective is _gerontological_ (jair′-Ən-tƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl).

The Latin word for _old_ is _senex_, the base on which _senile, senescent, senior_, and _senate_ are built.

1\. _senile_ (SEE′-nīl)—showing signs of the physical and/or mental deterioration that generally marks very old age. The noun is _senility_ (sƏ-NIL′-Ə-tee).

2\. _senescent_ (sƏ-NES′-Ənt)—aging, growing old. (Note the same suffix in this word as in _adolescent_, growing into an adult, _convalescent_, growing healthy again, and _obsolescent_, growing or becoming obsolete.) The noun is _senescence_ (sƏ-NES′-Əns).

3\. _senior_ (SEEN′-yƏr)—older. Noun: _seniority_ (seen-YAWR′-Ə-tee).

4\. _senate_ (SEN′-Ət)—originally a council of older, and presumably wiser, citizens.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                      | MEANING           |
| ----------------------------------------- | ----------------- |
|   1. _graphein_                           | to write          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   2. _cheir_ (_chiro_-)                   | hand              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   3. _kallos_                             | beauty            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   4. -_er_                                | one who           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   5. -_ic_                                | adjective suffix  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   6. _pyge_                               | buttocks          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   7. _kakos_                              | bad, harsh        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   8. _kardia_                             | heart             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
|   9. _photos_                             | light             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 10. _tele_-                               | distance          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 11. _bios_                                | life              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 12. _geras_                               | old age           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 13. _geron_                               | old man           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 14. _senex_                               | old               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |
| 15. -_escent_                             | growing, becoming |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                   |

#### USING THE WORDS <a href="#page103" id="page103"></a>

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _graphology_    | grƏ-FOL′-Ə-jee         |
| -------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   2. _graphological_ | graf′-Ə-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl     |
|   3. _calligraphy_   | kƏ-LIG′-rƏ-fee         |
|   4. _calligrapher_  | kƏ-LIG′-rƏ-fƏr         |
|   5. _calligraphic_  | kal′-Ə-GRAF′-ik        |
|   6. _callipygian_   | kal′-Ə-PIJ′-ee-Ən      |
|   7. _cacography_    | kƏ-KOG′-rƏ-fee         |
|   8. _cacographer_   | kƏ-KOG′-rƏ-fƏr         |
|   9. _cacographic_   | kak′-Ə-GRAF′-ik        |
| 10. _gerontology_    | jair′-Ən-TOL′-Ə-jee    |
| 11. _gerontological_ | jair′-Ən-tƏ-LOJ′-Ə-kƏl |
| 12. _senile_         | SEE′-nīl               |
| 13. _senility_       | sƏ-NIL′-Ə-tee          |
| 14. _senescent_      | sƏ-NES′-Ənt            |
| 15. _senescence_     | sƏ-NES′-Əns            |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. graphology  | a. possessed of beautiful buttocks                              |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2. calligraphy | b. science of the social, economic, etc. problems of the aged   |
| 3. callipygian | c. condition of aging or growing old                            |
| 4. cacography  | d. deteriorated old age                                         |
| 5. gerontology | e. analysis of handwriting                                      |
| 6. senility    | f. ugly, bad, illegible handwriting                             |
| 7. senescence  | g. beautiful handwriting; handwriting as an artistic expression |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–g, 3–a, 4–f, 5–b, 6–d, 7–c

***

**Do you understand the words?**

1\. _Graphology_ analyzes the grammar, spelling, and sentence structure of written material.

TRUE      FALSE

2\. A _calligrapher_ creates artistic forms out of alphabetical symbols.

TRUE      FALSE

3\. Tight slacks are best worn by those of _callipygian_ anatomy.

TRUE      FALSE

4\. _Cacographic_ writing is easy to read.

TRUE      FALSE

5\. _Gerontology_ aims to help old people live more comfortably.

TRUE      FALSE

6\. _Senile_ people are old but still vigorous and mentally alert.

TRUE      FALSE

7\. In a society dedicated to the worship of youth, _senescence_ is not an attractive prospect.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–T, 3–T, 4–F, 5–T, 6–F, 7–T

***

**Can you recall the words?**

1\. pertaining to the study of the non-medical problems of the aged (_adj._)

1\. G \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. growing old (_adj._)

2\. S \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. pertaining to handwriting as an artistic expression (_adj._)

3\. C \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. one who uses ugly, illegible handwriting

4\. C \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. mentally and physically deteriorated from old age

5\. S \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. pertaining to the analysis of handwriting (_adj._)

6\. G \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

7\. possessed of beautiful or shapely buttocks

7\. C \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–gerontological, 2–senescent, 3–calligraphic, 4–cacographer, 5–senile, 6–graphological, 7–callipygian

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Practitioner trained in Freudian techniques: (a) psychologist, (b) psychoanalyst, (c) psychotherapist

&#x20; 2\. Foot doctor: (a) podiatrist, (b) osteopath, (c) chiropractor

&#x20; 3\. Handwriting analyst: (a) graphologist, (b) chirographer, (c) cacographer

&#x20; 4\. Mentally or emotionally disturbed: (a) psychological, (b) psychopathic, (c) psychic

&#x20; 5\. Originating in the emotions: (a) psychic, (b) psychogenic, (c) psychoanalytic

&#x20; 6\. Describing bodily ailments tied up with the emotions: (a) psychosomatic, (b) psychopathic, (c) psychiatric

&#x20; 7\. Gum specialist: (a) periodontist, (b) pedodontist, (c) endodontist

&#x20; 8\. Specialist in tooth extraction: (a) orthodontist, (b) exodontist, (c) endodontist

&#x20; 9\. Blood-pressure apparatus: (a) barometer, (b) thermometer, (c) sphygmomanometer

10\. Prediction by palm reading: (a) chirography, (b) chiropody, (c) chiromancy

11\. Possessed of a shapely posterior: (a) calligraphic, (b) callipygian, (c) adolescent

12\. Artistic handwriting: (a) calligraphy, (b) chirography, (c) graphology

13\. Growing old: (a) senile, (b) geriatric, (c) senescent

14\. Medical specialty dealing with the aged: (a) gerontology, (b) geriatrics, (c) chiropractic

15\. Antisocial person who may commit criminal acts: (a) psychopath, (b) sociopath, (c) osteopath

***

KEY:  1–b, 2–a, 3–a, 4–b, 5–b, 6–a, 7–a, 8–b, 9–c, 10–c, 11–b, 12–a, 13–c, 14–b, 15–a _and b_

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| ROOT                    | MEANING                            |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _psyche_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   psychiatry    |                                    |
|   2. _iatreia_          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   podiatry      |                                    |
|   3. _soma_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   psychosomatic |                                    |
|   4. _pathos_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   osteopath     |                                    |
|   5. _orthos_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   orthodontia   |                                    |
|   6. _paidos_ (_ped_-)  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   pedodontist   |                                    |
|   7. _odontos_          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   exodontist    |                                    |
|   8. _pous, podos_      | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   platypus      |                                    |
|   9. _cheir_ (_chiro_-) | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   chiropodist   |                                    |
| 10. _okto_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   octopus       |                                    |
| 11. _graphein_          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   graphology    |                                    |
| 12. _kallos_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   calligraphy   |                                    |
| 13. _pyge_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   callipygian   |                                    |
| 14. _kakos_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   cacography    |                                    |
| 15. _photos_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   photography   |                                    |
| 16. _tele_-             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   telegraph     |                                    |
| 17. _bios_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   biography     |                                    |
| 18. _geras_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   geriatrics    |                                    |
| 19. _geron_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   gerontology   |                                    |
| 20. _senex_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   senate        |                                    |

***

KEY:  1–mind, 2–medical healing, 3–body, 4–disease, 5–straight, correct, 6–child, 7–tooth, 8–foot, 9–hand, 10–eight, 11–to write, 12–beauty, 13–buttocks, 14–bad, ugly, 15–light, 16–distance, 17–life, 18–old age, 19–old man, 20–old.

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST <a href="#page107" id="page107"></a>

1\. Latin _octoginta_ is a root related to Greek _okto_, eight. How old is an _octogenarian_ (ok′-tƏ-jƏ-NAIR′-ee-Ən)? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. You are familiar with _kakos_, bad, harsh, as in _cacography_, and with _phone_, sound, as in _phonograph._ Can you construct a word ending in the letter _y_ that means _harsh, unpleasant sound?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (Can you pronounce it?)

3\. Using _callipygian_ as a model, can you construct a word to describe an ugly, unshapely rear end? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (Can you pronounce it?)

4\. Using the prefix _tele_-, distance, can you think of the word for a field glass that permits the viewer to see great distances? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. How about a word for the instrument that transmits sound over a distance? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Finally, what is it that makes it possible for you to view happenings that occur a great distance away? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(_Answers in Chapter 18_)

#### BECOMING WORD-CONSCIOUS

Perhaps, if you have been working as assiduously with this book as I have repeatedly counseled, you have noticed an interesting phenomenon.

This phenomenon is as follows: You read a magazine article and suddenly you see one or more of the words you have recently learned. Or you open a book and there again are some of the words you have been working with. In short, all your reading seems to call to your attention the very words you’ve been studying.

Why? Have I, with uncanny foresight, picked words which havesuddenly and inexplicably become popular among writers? Obviously, that’s nonsense.

The change is in you. You have now begun to be alert to words, you have developed what is known in psychology as a “mind-set” toward certain words. Therefore, whenever these words occur in your reading you take special notice of them.

The same words occurred before—and just as plentifully—but since they presented little communication to you, you reacted to them with an unseeing eye, with an ungrasping mind. You were figuratively, and almost literally, blind to them.

Do you remember when you bought, or contemplated buying, a new car? Let’s say it was a Toyota. Suddenly you began to see Toyotas all around you—you had a Toyota “mind-set.”

It is thus with anything new in your life. Development of a “mind-set” means that the new experience has become very real, very important, almost vital.

If you have become suddenly alert to the new words you have been learning, you’re well along toward your goal of building a superior vocabulary. _You are beginning to live in a new and different intellectual atmosphere—nothing less!_

On the other hand, if the phenomenon I have been describing has not yet occurred, do not despair. It will. I am alerting you to its possibilities—recognize it and welcome it when it happens.

(_End of Session 10_)

***

<sup>1</sup> _Psychopathy_ is usually characterized by antisocial and extremely egocentric behavior. A _psychopath_ (SĪ′-kƏ-path′), sometimes called a _psychopathic personality_, appears to be lacking an inner moral censor, and often commits criminal acts, without anxiety or guilt, in order to obtain immediate gratification of desires. Such a person may be utterly lacking in sexual restraint, or addicted to hard drugs. Some psychologists prefer the label _sociopath_ (SŌ′-shee-Ə-path′ _or_ SŌ′-see-Ə-path′) for this type of personality to indicate the absence of a social conscience.

<sup>2</sup> But see _calligrapher_ in the next session.

<sup>3</sup> An entrancing word that also derives from _kallos_ is _callipygian_ (kal′-Ə-PIJ′-ee-Ən), an adjective describing a shapely or attractive rear end, or a person so endowed—the combining root is _pyge_, buttocks.
