# 10

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT VARIOUS SPEECH HABITS

## (_Sessions 24–27_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What adjective describes people who:

• _are disinclined to conversation?_

• _are brief and to the point in their speech?_

• _are blocked or incoherent in their speech?_

• _show by their speech that they are trite and unimaginative?_

• _use more words than necessary?_

• _are forcefully compelling and logical in their speech?_

• _talk rapidly and fluently?_

• _are noisy and clamorous?_

• _are talkative?_

***

### SESSION 24 <a href="#page240" id="page240"></a>

Perhaps some of your richest and most satisfying experiences have been with people to whom you can just talk, talk, talk. As you speak, previously untapped springs of ideas and emotions begin to flow; you hear yourself saying things you never thought you knew.

What kinds of people might you find yourself in conversation with? In this chapter we start by examining ten types, discovering the adjective that aptly describes each one.

#### IDEAS

**1. saying little**

_There are some people who just don’t like to talk._ It’s not that they prefer to listen. Good listeners hold up their end of the conversation delightfully—with appropriate facial expressions; with empathetic smiles, giggles, squeals, and sighs at just the right time; and with encouraging nods or phrases like “Go on!”, “Fantastic!”, “And then what happened?”

_These_ people like neither to talk nor to listen—they act as if conversation is a bore, even a painful waste of time. Try to engage them, and the best you may expect for your efforts is a vacant stare, a noncommittal grunt, or an impatient silence. Finally, in frustration, you give up, thinking. “Are they self-conscious? Do they hate people? Do they hate _me?_”

The adjective: _taciturn_

**2. saying little—meaning much**

There is a well-known anecdote about Calvin Coolidge, who, when he was President, was often called (though probably not to his face) “Silent Cal”:

A young newspaperwoman was sitting next to him at a banquet, so the story goes, and turned to him mischievously.

“Mr. Coolidge,” she said, “I have a bet with my editor that I can get you to say more than two words to me this evening.”

“_You lose_,” Coolidge rejoined simply.

The adjective: _laconic_

**3. when the words won’t come**

Under the pressure of some strong emotion—fear, rage, anger, for example—people may find it difficult, or even impossible, to utter words, to get their feelings unjumbled and untangled enough to form understandable sentences. They undoubtedly have a lot they want to say, but the best they can do is sputter!

The adjective: _inarticulate_

**4. much talk, little sense**

Miss Bates, a character in _Emma_, a novel by Jane Austen:

“So obliging of you! No, we should not have heard, if it had not been for this particular circumstance, of her being able to come here so soon. My mother is so delighted! For she is to be three months with us at least. Three months, she says so, positively, as I am going to have the pleasure of reading to you. The case is, you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly. I was going to say, but, however, different countries, and so she wrote a very urgent letter to her mother, or her father, I declare I do not know which it was, but we shall see presently in Jane’s letter …”

The adjective: _garrulous_

**5. unoriginal**

Some people are completely lacking in originality and imagination—and their talk shows it. Everything they say is trite, hackneyed,commonplace, humorless—their speech patterns are full of clichés and stereotypes, their phraseology is without sparkle.

The adjective: _banal_

**6. words, words, words!**

They talk and talk and talk—it’s not so much the quantity you object to as the repetitiousness. They phrase, rephrase, and re-rephrase their thoughts—using far more words than necessary, overwhelming you with words, drowning you with them, until your only thought is how to escape, or maybe how to die.

The adjective: _verbose_

**7. words in quick succession**

They are rapid, fluent talkers, the words seeming to roll off their tongues with such ease and lack of effort, and sometimes with such copiousness, that you listen with amazement.

The adjective: _voluble_

**8. words that convince**

They express their ideas persuasively, forcefully, brilliantly, and in a way that calls for wholehearted assent and agreement from an intelligent listener.

The adjective: _cogent_

**9. the sound and the fury**

Their talk is loud, noisy, clamorous, vehement. What may be lacking in content is compensated for in force and loudness.

The adjective: _vociferous_

**10. quantity**

They talk a lot—a _whole_ lot. They may be voluble, vociferous,garrulous, verbose, but never inarticulate, taciturn, or laconic. No matter. It’s the quantity and continuity that are most conspicuous. “Were you vaccinated with a phonograph needle?” is the question you are tempted to ask as you listen.

The adjective: _loquacious_

These ten words revolve around the idea of varying kinds and ways of talking and not talking. Many of the adjectives are close in meaning, but each contains its unique difference.

| QUALITY                                   | ADJECTIVE    |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------ |
|   1. silence, unresponsiveness            | taciturn     |
|   2. economy, brevity, meaningfulness     | laconic      |
|   3. awkwardness, sputtering, incoherence | inarticulate |
|   4. rambling chatter                     | garrulous    |
|   5. hackneyed, unoriginal phraseology    | banal        |
|   6. wordiness, repetitiousness           | verbose      |
|   7. fluency, rapidity                    | voluble      |
|   8. logic, clarity, persuasiveness       | cogent       |
|   9. noise, vehemence                     | vociferous   |
| 10. talkativeness                         | loquacious   |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _taciturn_     | TAS′-Ə-turn         |
| ------------------- | ------------------- |
|   2. _laconic_      | lƏ-KON′-ik          |
|   3. _inarticulate_ | in′-ahr-TIK′-yƏ-lƏt |
|   4. _garrulous_    | GAIR′-Ə-lƏs         |
|   5. _banal_        | BAY′-nƏl            |
|   6. _verbose_      | vƏr-BŌS′            |
|   7. _voluble_      | VOL′-yƏ-bƏl         |
|   8. _cogent_       | KŌ′-jƏnt            |
|   9. _vociferous_   | vō-SIF′-Ər-Əs       |
| 10. _loquacious_    | lō-KWAY′-shƏs       |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. taciturn       | a. chattering meaninglessly            |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------- |
|   2. laconic      | b. wordy                               |
|   3. inarticulate | c. trite, hackneyed, unoriginal        |
|   4. garrulous    | d. fluent and rapid                    |
|   5. banal        | e. noisy, loud                         |
|   6. verbose      | f. sputtering unintelligibly           |
|   7. voluble      | g. talkative                           |
|   8. cogent       | h. brilliantly compelling, persuasive  |
|   9. vociferous   | i. unwilling to engage in conversation |
| 10. loquacious    | j. using few words packed with meaning |

***

KEY:  1–i, 2–j, 3–f, 4–a, 5–c, 6–b, 7–d, 8–h, 9–e, 10–g

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Do _taciturn_ people usually make others feel comfortable and welcome?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Does a _laconic_ speaker use more words than necessary?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Does rage make some people _inarticulate?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Is it interesting to listen to _garrulous_ old men?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Do _banal_ speakers show a great deal of originality?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Is _verbose_ a complimentary term?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is it easy to be _voluble_ when you don’t know the subject you are talking about?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Do unintelligent people usually make _cogent_ statements?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Is a _vociferous_ demand ordinarily made by a shy, quiet person?

YES      NO

10\. Do _loquacious_ people spend more time talking than listening?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–no, 3–yes, 4–no, 5–no, 6–no, 7–no, 8–no, 9–no, 10–yes

***

**Can you recall the words?**

Do you know that new nerve patterns are formed by repeated actions? As a very young child, you tied your shoelaces and buttoned your clothing with great concentration—the activity was directed, controlled, purposeful, exciting. As you grew older and more skillful, you tied and buttoned with scarcely a thought of what you were doing. Your fingers flew about their task almost automatically—for the habit had formed a nerve pattern and the action needed little if any conscious attention.

That’s simple enough to understand. If you do not remember your own experiences, you can observe the phenomenon of struggling with a skill, mastering it, and finally making it a self-starting habit by watching any young child. Or you can simply take my word for it.

You need not take my word for the way a mastery of new words is acquired. You can see in yourself, as you work with this book, how adding words to your vocabulary is exactly analogous to a child’s mastery of shoelacing. First you struggle with the concepts; then you eventually master them; finally, by frequent work with the new words (now you see the reason for the great number of exercises, the repetitious writing, saying, thinking) you build up new nerve patterns and you begin to use the new words with scarcely any consciousness of what you are doing.

Watch this common but important phenomenon closely as you do the next exercise. Your total absorption of the material so far has given you complete mastery of our ten basic words. Prove that you are beginning to form new nerve patterns in relation to these words by writing the one that fits each brief definition. The more quickly you think of the word that applies, the surer you can be that using these words will soon be as automatic and unself-consciousas putting on your shoes or buttoning/zipping yourself up in the morning.

&#x20; 1\. talkative

&#x20; 1\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. noisy, vehement, clamorous

&#x20; 2\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. incoherent; sputtering

&#x20; 3\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. gabbing ceaselessly and with little meaning

&#x20; 4\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. disinclined to conversation

&#x20; 5\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. talking in hackneyed phraseology

&#x20; 6\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. showing a fine economy in the use of words

&#x20; 7\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. forceful and convincing

&#x20; 8\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. talking rapidly and fluently

&#x20; 9\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. using more words than necessary

10\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–loquacious, 2–vociferous, 3–inarticulate, 4–garrulous, 5–taciturn, 6–banal, 7–laconic, 8–cogent, 9–voluble, 10–verbose

***

(_End of Session 24_)

### SESSION 25

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. about keeping one’s mouth shut**

If you let your mind play over some of the _taciturn_ people you know, you will realize that their abnormal disinclination to conversation makes them seem morose, sullen, and unfriendly. Cal Coolidge’s _taciturnity_ was world-famous, and no one, I am sure,ever conceived of him as cheerful, overfriendly, or particularly sociable. There are doubtless many possible causes of such verbal rejection of the world: perhaps lack of self-assurance, feelings of inadequacy or hostility, excessive seriousness or introspection, or just plain having nothing to say. Maybe, in Coolidge’s case, he was saving up his words—after he did not “choose to run” in 1928, he wrote a daily column for the New York _Herald Tribune_ at a rumored price of two dollars a word—and, according to most critics (probably all Democrats), he had seemed wiser when he kept silent. Coolidge hailed from New England, and _taciturnity_ (tas-Ə-TURN′-Ə-tee) in that part of the country, so some people say, is considered a virtue. Who knows, the cause may be geographical and climatic, rather than psychological.

_Taciturn_ is from a Latin verb _taceo_, to be silent, and is one of those words whose full meaning cannot be expressed by any other combination of syllables. It has many synonyms, among them _silent, uncommunicative, reticent, reserved, secretive, close-lipped_, and _close-mouthed;_ but no other word indicates the _permanent, habitual_, and _temperamental_ disinclination to talk implied by _taciturn._

**2. better left unsaid**

_Tacit_ (TAS′-it) derives also from _taceo._

Here is a man dying of cancer. He suspects what his disease is, and everyone else, of course, knows. Yet he never mentions the dread word, and no one who visits him ever breathes a syllable of it in his hearing. It is _tacitly_ understood by all concerned that the word will remain forever unspoken.

(Such a situation today, however, may or may not be typical—there appears to be a growing tendency among physicians and family to be open and honest with people who are dying.)

Consider another situation:

An executive is engaging in extracurricular activities with her secretary. Yet during office time they are as formal and distant as any two human beings can well be. Neither of them ever said to the other, “Now, look here, we may be lovers after five o’clock,but between nine and five we must preserve the utmost decorum, okay?” Such speech, such a verbal arrangement, is considered unnecessary—so we may say that the two have a _tacit_ agreement (i.e., nothing was ever actually _said_) to maintain a complete employer-employee relationship during office hours.

Anything _tacit_, then, is unspoken, unsaid, not verbalized. We speak of a _tacit_ agreement, arrangement, acceptance, rejection, assent, refusal, etc. A person is never called _tacit._

The noun is _tacitness_ (TAS′-it-nƏs). (Bear in mind that you can transform any adjective into a noun by adding -_ness_, though in many cases there may be a more sophisticated, or more common, noun form.)

Changing the _a_ of the root _taceo_ to _i_, and adding the prefix _re_-, again, and the adjective suffix -_ent_, we can construct the English word _reticent_ (RET′-Ə-sƏnt).

Someone is _reticent_ who prefers to keep silent, whether out of shyness, embarrassment, or fear of revealing what should not be revealed. (The idea of “againness” in the prefix has been lost in the current meaning of the word.)

We have frequently made nouns out of -_ent_ adjectives. Write two possible noun forms of _reticent: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\__, or, less commonly, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**3. talk, talk, talk!**

_Loquacious_ people love to talk. This adjective is not necessarily a put-down, but the implication, when you so characterize such people, is that you wish they would pause for breath once in a while so that _you_ can get your licks in. The noun is _loquacity_ (lō-KWAS′-Ə-tee), or, of course, _loquaciousness._

The word derives from Latin _loquor_, to speak, a root found also in:

1\. _soliloquy_ (sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwee)—a speech to oneself (_loquor_ plus _solus_, alone), or, etymologically, a speech when alone.

We often talk to ourselves, but usually silently, the words going through our minds but not actually passing our lips. The term _soliloqu&#x79;_&#x69;s commonly applied to utterances made in a play by characters who are speaking their thoughts aloud so the audience won’t have to guess. The _soliloquist_ (sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwist) may be alone; or other members of the cast may be present on stage, but of course they don’t hear what’s being said, because they’re not supposed to know. Eugene O’Neill made novel uses of _soliloquies_ in _Mourning Becomes Electra_—the characters made honest disclosures of their feelings and thoughts to the audience, but kept the other players in the dark.

The verb is to _soliloquize_ (sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwīz′).

2\. A _ventriloquist_ (ven-TRIL′-Ə-kwist) is one who can throw his voice. A listener thinks the sound is coming from some source other than the person speaking. The combining root is Latin _venter, ventris_, belly; etymologically, _ventriloquism_ (ven-TRIL′-Ə-kwiz-Əm) is the art of “speaking from the belly.” The adjective is _ventriloquistic_ (ven-tril′-Ə-KWIS′-tik). Can you figure out how the verb will end? Write the verb: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. _Colloquial_ (kƏ-LŌ′-kwee-Əl) combines _loquor_, to speak, with the prefix _con_-. (_Con_- is spelled _col_- before a root starting with _l;_ _cor_- before a root starting with _r; com_- before a root starting with _m, p_, or _b._) When people speak together they are engaging in conversation—and their language is usually more informal and less rigidly grammatical than what you might expect in writing or in public addresses. _Colloquial_ patterns are perfectly correct—they are simply informal, and suitable to everyday conversation.

A _colloquialism_ (kƏ-LŌ′-kwee-Ə-liz-Əm), therefore, is a _conversational-style_ expression, like “He hasn’t got any” or “Who are you going with?” as contrasted to the formal or literary “He has none” or “With whom are you going?” _Colloquial_ English is the English you and I talk on everyday occasions—it is not slangy, vulgar, or illiterate.

4\. A _circumlocution_ (sur-kƏm-lō-KY′-shƏn) is, etymologically, a “talking around” (_circum_-, around). Any way of expressing an idea that is roundabout or indirect is _circumlocutory_ (sur′-kƏm-LOK′-yƏ-tawr′-ee)—you are now familiar with the common adjective suffix -_ory._

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY <a href="#page250" id="page250"></a>

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING          |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
|   1. _taceo_                                      | to be silent     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   2. -_ity_                                       | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   3. -_ness_                                      | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   4. -_ent_                                       | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   5. -_ence, -ency_                               | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   6. _re_-                                        | again            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   7. _loquor_                                     | to speak         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   8. _solus_                                      | alone            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   9. -_ist_                                       | one who          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 10. -_ize_                                        | verb suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 11. _venter, ventris_                             | belly            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 12. -_ic_                                         | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 13. -_ous_                                        | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 14. _con-, col-, com-, cor_-                      | with, together   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 15. -_al_                                         | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 16. -_ism_                                        | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |

#### WORKING WITH THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _taciturnity_    | tas-Ə-TURN′-Ə-tee         |
| --------------------- | ------------------------- |
|   2. _tacit_          | TAS′-it                   |
|   3. _tacitness_      | TAS′-Ət-nƏs               |
|   4. _reticent_       | RET′-Ə-sƏnt               |
|   5. _reticence_      | RET′-Ə-sƏns               |
|   6. _reticency_      | RET′-Ə-sƏn-see            |
| 7. _loquaciousness_   | lō-KWAY′-shƏs-nƏs         |
|   8. _loquacity_      | lō-KWAS′-Ə-tee            |
|   9. _soliloquy_      | sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwee            |
| 10. _soliloquist_     | sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwist           |
| 11. _soliloquize_     | sƏ-LIL′-Ə-kwīz′           |
| 12. _ventriloquist_   | ven′-TRIL′-Ə-kwist        |
| 13. _ventriloquism_   | ven-TRIL′-Ə-kwiz-Əm       |
| 14. _ventriloquistic_ | ven-tril′-Ə-KWIS′-tik     |
| 15. _ventriloquize_   | ven-TRIL′-Ə-kwīz′         |
| 16. _colloquial_      | kƏ-LŌ′-kwee-Əl            |
| 17. _colloquialism_   | kƏ-LŌ′-kwee-Ə-liz-Əm      |
| 18. _circumlocution_  | sur′-kƏm-lō-KY′-shƏn      |
| 19. _circumlocutory_  | sur′-kƏm-LOK′-yƏ-tawr′-ee |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. taciturnity      | a. unwillingness to talk, or disclose, out of fear, shyness, reserve, etc. |
| ------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. tacitness      | b. talking, or a speech, “to oneself”                                      |
|   3. reticence      | c. art of throwing one’s voice                                             |
|   4. loquacity      | d. unwillingness to engage in conversation                                 |
|   5. soliloquy      | e. informal expression used in everyday conversation                       |
|   6. ventriloquism  | f. state of being understood though not actually expressed                 |
|   7. colloquialism  | g. a talking around; method of talking indirectly or in a roundabout way   |
|   8. circumlocution | h. talkativeness                                                           |

***

KEY:  1–d, 2–f, 3–a, 4–h, 5–b, 6–c, 7–e, 8–g

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. A _tacit_ understanding is put into words.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 2\. Inhibited people are seldom _reticent_ about expressing anger.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. A _soliloquist_ expresses his thoughts aloud.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. A _ventriloquistic_ performance on stage involves a dummy who appears to be talking.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. A _colloquial_ style of writing is ungrammatical.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. _Circumlocutory_ speech is direct and forthright.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. _Inarticulate_ people are generally given to _loquaciousness._

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 8\. A _soliloquy_ is a dialogue.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–F, 3–T, 4–T, 5–F, 6–F, 7–F, 8–F

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. to speak to oneself

&#x20; 1\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. to throw one’s voice

&#x20; 2\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. unwillingness to engage in conversation

&#x20; 3\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. unspoken

&#x20; 4\. T\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. referring to an indirect, roundabout style of expression (_adj._)

&#x20; 5\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. suitable for informal conversation

&#x20; 6\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. talkativeness

&#x20; 7\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. reluctance to express one’s feelings or thoughts

&#x20; 8\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9.a speech to oneself, especially in a play

&#x20; 9\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. an indirect, roundabout expression

10\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–soliloquize, 2–ventriloquize, 3–taciturnity, 4–tacit, 5–circumlocutory, 6–colloquial, 7–loquaciousness _or_ loquacity, 8–reticence _or_ reticency, 9–soliloquy, 10–circumlocution

***

(_End of Session 25_)

### SESSION 26

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. a Spartan virtue**

In ancient Sparta, originally known as _Laconia_, the citizens were long-suffering, hard-bitten, stoical, and military-minded, and were even more noted for their economy of speech than Vermonters, if that is possible. Legend has it that when Philip of Macedonia was storming the gates of Sparta (or Laconia), he sent a message to the besieged king saying, “If we capture your city we will burn it to the ground.” A one-word answer came back: “If.” It was now probably Philip’s turn to be speechless, though history does not record his reaction.

It is from the name _Laconia_ that we derive our word _laconic_—pithy, concise, economical in the use of words almost to the point of curtness; precisely the opposite of _verbose._

Like the man who was waiting at a lunch counter for a ham sandwich. When it was ready, the clerk inquired politely, “Will you eat it here, or take it with you?”

“Both,” was the _laconic_ reply.

Or like the woman who was watching a lush imbibing dry martinis at a Third Avenue bar in New York City. The drunk downed the contents of each cocktail glass at one gulp, daintily nibbled and swallowed the bowl, then finally turned the glass over and ate the base. The stem he threw into a corner. This amazing gustatory feat went on for half an hour, until a dozen stems were lying shattered in the corner, and the drunk had chewed and swallowed enough bowls and bases to start a glass factory. He suddenly turned to the lady and asked belligerently, “I suppose you think I’m cuckoo, don’t you?” “Sure—the stem is the best part,” was the _laconic_ answer.

(It was doubtless this same gentleman, in his accustomed state of intoxication, who found himself painfully weaving his way along Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills, California—he had somehow gotten on a TWA jetliner instead of the subway—when he realized, almost too late, that he was going to bump into a smartly dressed young woman who had just stepped out of her Mercedes-Benz to go window-shopping along the avenue. He quickly veered left, but by some unexplainable magnetic attraction the woman veered in the same direction, again making collision apparently inevitable. With an adroit maneuver, the drunk swung to the right—the lady, by now thoroughly disoriented, did the same. Finally both jammed on the brakes and came to a dead stop, face to face, and not six inches apart; and as the alcoholic fumes assailed the young lady’s nostrils, she sneered at the reeking, swaying man, as much in frustration as in contempt: “Oh! How gauche!” “Fine!” was his happy response. “How goesh with you?” This answer, however, is not _laconic_, merely confused.)

We have learned that -_ness, -ity_, and -_ism_ are suffixes that transform adjectives into nouns—and all three can be used with _laconic:_

…with characteristic _laconicness_ (lƏ-KON′-Ək-nƏs)

…her usual _laconicity_ (lak′-Ə-NIS′-Ə-tce)

…his habitual _laconism_ (LAK′-Ə-niz-Əm)

…with, for him, unusual _laconicism_ (lƏ-KON′-Ə-siz-Əm)

A _laconism_ is also the expression itself that is pithy and concise, as the famous report from a naval commander in World War II: “Saw sub, sank same.”

**2. brilliant**

_Cogent_ is a term of admiration. A _cogent_ argument is well put, convincing, hardly short of brilliant. _Cogency_ (KŌ′-jƏn-see) shows a keen mind, an ability to think clearly and logically. The word derives from the Latin verb _cogo_, to drive together, compel, force. A _cogent_ argument _compels_ acceptance because of its logic, its persuasiveness, its appeal to one’s sense of reason.

**3. back to talk**

You will recall that _loquor_, to speak, is the source of _loquacity, soliloquy, ventriloquism, colloquialism, circumlocution._ This root is also the base on which _eloquent_ (EL′-Ə-kwƏnt), _magniloquent_ (mag-NIL′-Ə-kwƏnt), and _grandiloquent_ (gran-DIL′-Ə-kwƏnt) are built.

The _eloquent_ person speaks _out_ (_e_-, from _ex_-, out), is vividly expressive, fluent, forceful, or persuasive in language (“the prosecutor’s _eloquent_ plea to the jury”). The word is partially synonymous with _cogent_, but _cogent_ implies irresistible logical reasoning and intellectual keenness, while _eloquent_ suggests artistic expression, strong emotional appeal, the skillful use of language to move and arouse a listener.

_Magniloquent_ (_magnus_, large) and _grandiloquent_ (_grandis_, grand) are virtually identical in meaning. _Magniloquence_ or _grandiloquence_ is the use of high-flown, grandiose, even pompous language; of large and impressive words; of lofty, flowery, or over-elegant phraseology. Home is _a place of residence;_ wife is _helpmate, helpmeet_, or _better half;_ women are _the fair sex;_ children are _offspring_ or _progeny;_ a doctor is a _member of the medical fraternity;_ people are the _species Homo sapiens_, etc., etc.

_Loquacious, verbose, voluble_, and _garrulous_ people are all talkative; but each type, you will recall, has a special quality.

If you are _loquacious_, you talk a lot because you _like_ to talk and doubtless have a lot to say.

If you are _verbose_, you smother your ideas with excess words, with such an overabundance of words that your listener either drops into a state of helpless confusion or falls asleep.

If you are _voluble_, you speak rapidly, fluently, glibly, without hesitation, stutter, or stammer; you are vocal, verbal, and highly articulate.

If you are _garrulous_, you talk constantly, and usually aimlessly and meaninglessly, about trifles. We often hear the word used in “a _garrulous_ old man” or “a _garrulous_ old woman,” since in very advanced age the mind may wander and lose the ability to discriminate between the important and the unimportant, between the interesting and the dull.

_Verbose_ is from Latin _verbum_, word—the _verbose_ person is wordy.

_Voluble_ comes from Latin _volvo, volutus_, to roll—words effortlessly roll off the _voluble_ speaker’s tongue.

And _garrulous_ derives from Latin _garrio_, to chatter—a _garrulous_ talker chatters away like a monkey.

The suffix -_ness_ can be added to all these adjectives to form nouns. Alternate noun forms end in -_ity:_

| _verbosity_  | (vƏr-BOS′-Ə-tee)    |
| ------------ | ------------------- |
| _volubility_ | (vor-yƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee) |
| _garrulity_  | (gƏ-RL′-Ə-tee)      |

**4. at large**

We discovered _magnus_, large, big, great, in Chapter 9, in discussing _Magnavox_ (etymologically, “big voice”), and find it again in _magniloquent_ (etymologically, “talking big”). The root occurs in a number of other words:

1\. _Magnanimous_ (mag-NAN′-Ə-mƏs)—big-hearted, generous, forgiving (etymologically, “great-minded”). (_Magnus_ plus _animus_, mind.) We’ll discuss this word in depth in Chapter 12.

2\. _Magnate_ (MAG′-nayt)—a person of great power or influence, a big wheel, as a business _magnate._

3\. _Magnify_—to make larger, or make seem larger (_magnus_ plus -_fy_ from _facio_, to make), as in “_magnify_ your problems.”

4\. _Magnificent—magnus_ plus _fic_-, from _facio._

5\. _Magnitude—magnus_ plus the common noun suffix -_tude_, as in _fortitude, multitude, gratitude_, etc.

6._Magnum_ (as of champagne or wine)—a large bottle, generally two fifths of a gallon.

7\. _Magnum opus_ (MAG′-nƏm Ō′-pes)—etymologically, a “big work”; actually, the greatest work, or masterpiece, of an artist, writer, or composer. _Opus_ is the Latin word for _work;_ the plural of _opus_ is used in the English word _opera_, etymologically, “a number of works,” actually a musical drama containing overture, singing, and other forms of music, i.e., many musical works. The verb form _opero_, to work, occurs in _operate, co-operate, operator_, etc.

**5. words, words, words!**

Latin _verbum_ is _word._ A _verb_ is the important word in a sentence; _verbatim_ (vƏr-BAY′-tim) is word-for-word (a _verbatim_ report).

_Verbal_ (VUR′-bƏl), ending in the adjective suffix -_al_, may refer either to a _verb_, or to words in general (a _verbal_ fight); or it may mean, loosely, _oral_ or _spoken_, rather than written (_verbal_ agreement or contract); or, describing people (“she is quite _verbal_”), it may refer to a ready ability to put feelings or thoughts into words.

Working from _verbal_, can you add a common verb suffix to form a word meaning _to put into words? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\__

_Verbiage_ (VUR′-bee-Əj) has two meanings: an excess of words (“Such _verbiage!_”); or a style or manner of using words (medical _verbiage_, military _verbiage_).

**6. roll on, and on!**

_Volvo, volutus_, to roll, the source of _voluble_, is the root on which many important English words are based.

_Revolve_ (rƏ-VOLV′)—roll again (and again), or keep turning round. Wheels _revolve_, the earth _revolves_ around the sun, the cylinder of a revolver _revolves_, (The prefix is _re_-, back or again.)

The noun is _revolution_ (rev-Ə-L′-shƏn), which can be one such complete rolling, or, by logical extension, a radical change of any sort (TV was responsible for a _revolution_ in the entertainment industry), especially political (the American, or French,_Revolution_). The adjective _revolutionary_ (rev′-Ə-L′-shƏn-air′-ee) introduces us to a new adjective suffix, -_ary_, as in _contrary, disciplinary, stationary, imaginary_, etc. (But -_ary_ is sometimes also a noun suffix, as in _dictionary, commentary_, etc.)

Add different prefixes to _volvo_ to construct two more English words:

1\. _involve_—etymologically, “roll in” (“I didn’t want to get _involved!_”). Noun: _involvement._

2\. _evolve_ (Ə-VOLV′)—etymologically, “roll out” (_e_-, out); hence to unfold, or gradually develop (“The final plan _evolved_ from some informal discussions”; “The political party _evolved_ from a group of interested citizens who met frequently to protest government actions”).

By analogy with the forms derived from _revolve_, can you construct the noun and adjective of _evolve?_ Noun: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Adjective: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING          |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
|   1. _Laconia_                                    | Sparta           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   2. -_ness_                                      | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   3. -_ism_                                       | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   4. -_ity_                                       | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   5. _e_- (_ex_-)                                 | out              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   6. -_ent_                                       | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   7. -_ence_                                      | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   8. _magnus_                                     | big              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   9. _grandis_                                    | grand            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 10. _verbum_                                      | word             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 11. _volvo, volutus_                              | to roll          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 12. _garrio_                                      | to chatter       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 13. _animus_                                      | mind             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 14. -_fy_                                         | to make          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 15. -_tude_                                       | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 16. _opus_                                        | work             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 17. _opero_                                       | _to_ work        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 18. -_al_                                         | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 19. -_ize_                                        | verb suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 20. _re_-                                         | again, back      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 21. -_ary_                                        | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 22. _in_-                                         | in               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _laconicity_     | lak′-Ə-NIS′-Ə-tee  |
| --------------------- | ------------------ |
|   2. _laconism_       | LAK′-Ə-niz-Əm      |
|   3. _laconicism_     | lƏ-KON′-Ə-siz-Əm   |
|   4. _eloquent_       | EL′-Ə-kwƏnt        |
|   5. _eloquence_      | EL′-Ə-kwƏns        |
|   6. _magniloquent_   | mag-NIL′-Ə-kwƏnt   |
|   7. _magniloquence_  | mag-NIL′-Ə-kwƏns   |
|   8. _grandiloquent_  | gran-DIL′-Ə-kwƏnt  |
|   9. _grandiloquence_ | gran-DIL′-Ə-kwƏns  |
| 10. _verbosity_       | vƏr-BOS′-Ə-tee     |
| 11. _volubility_      | vol′-yƏ-BIL′-Ə-tee |
| 12. _garrulity_       | gƏ-R′-lƏ-tee       |
| 13. _cogency_         | KŌ′-jƏn-see        |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _magnanimous_  | mag-NAN′-Ə-mƏs         |
| ------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   2. _magnate_      | MAG′-nayt              |
|   3. _magnum opus_  | MAG′-nƏm Ō′-pƏs        |
|   4. _verbatim_     | vƏr-BAY′-tim           |
|   5. _verbal_       | VUR′-bƏl               |
|   6. _verbalize_    | VUR′-bƏ-līz′           |
|   7. _verbiage_     | VUR′-bee-Əj            |
|   8. _revolve_      | rƏ-VOLV′               |
|   9. _revolution_   | rev′-Ə-L′-shƏn         |
| 10. _revolutionary_ | rev′-Ə-L′-shƏ-nair′-ee |
| 11._evolve_         | Ə-VOLV′                |
| 12. _evolution_     | ev′-Ə-LOO′-shƏn        |
| 13. _evolutionary_  | ev′-Ə-L′-shƏ-nair′-ee  |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. laconicity      | a. floweriness, pompousness, or elegance in speech            |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. eloquence     | b. incessant chatter with little meaning                      |
|   3. magniloquence | c. big wheel; important or influential person                 |
|   4. verbosity     | d. great artistic work; masterpiece                           |
|   5. volubility    | e. a gradual unfolding or development; “a rolling out”        |
|   6. garrulity     | f. “a rolling round”; radical change; political upheaval      |
|   7. magnum opus   | g. great economy in speech                                    |
|   8. magnate       | h. fluency, ease, and/or rapidity of speech                   |
|   9. revolution    | i. great, artistic, or emotional expressiveness               |
| 10. evolution      | j. wordiness                                                  |
| 11. cogency        | k. persuasiveness through logic; keen-mindedness in reasoning |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–i, 3–a, 4–j, 5–h, 6–b, 7–d, 8–c, 9–f, 10–e, 11–k

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. laconism        | a. word for word                                                              |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. verbiage      | b. to put into words                                                          |
|   3. verbalize     | c. causing, or resulting from, radical change; new and totally different      |
|   4. verbal        | d. resulting or developing gradually from (something)                         |
|   5. verbatim      | e. expressive; emotionally moving                                             |
|   6. revolutionary | f. pithiness or economy of expression; word or phrase packed with meaning     |
|   7. evolutionary  | g. big-hearted; generous, forgiving                                           |
|   8. grandiloquent | h. referring or pertaining to, or involving, words; oral, rather than written |
|   9. eloquent      | i. using flossy, flowery, elegant, or impressive phraseology                  |
| 10. magnanimous    | j. wordiness; style or manner of using words; type of words                   |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–j, 3–b, 4–h, 5–a, 6–c, 7–d, 8–i, 9–e, 10–g

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Is _laconicism_ characteristic of a verbose speaker?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Does a _magniloquent_ speaker use short, simple words?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Does a frog _evolve_ from a tadpole?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Is an _eloquent_ speaker interesting to listen to?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Do verbose people use a lot of _verbiage?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Is _volubility_ characteristic of an inarticulate person?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Does _verbosity_ show a careful and economical use of words?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is a _verbal_ person usually inarticulate?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Is a _magnun opus_ one of the lesser works of a writer, artist, or composer?

YES      NO

10\. Is a _magnanimous_ person selfish and petty-minded?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–no, 3–yes, 4–yes, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–no, 8–no, 9–no, 10–no

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. gradually unfolding, resulting, or developing (_adj._)

&#x20; 1\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. causing, or resulting from, radical change (_adj._)

&#x20; 2\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. quality of conciseness and economy in the use of words

&#x20; 3\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. expressiveness in the use of words

&#x20; 4\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. turn round and round

&#x20; 5\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. important person, as in the commercial world

&#x20; 6\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. unselfish; generous; noble in motive; big-hearted; forgiving

&#x20; 7\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. using words easily; vocal; articulate; referring to, or involving, words; oral, rather than written

&#x20; 8\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. style of word usage; type of words; overabundance of words

&#x20; 9\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. wordiness; quality of using excess words

10\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. elegance in word usage

11\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. quality of chattering on and on about trivia, or with little meaning

12\. G\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. fluency and ease in speech

13\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. word for word

14\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. masterpiece; great artistic work

15\. M\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16\. persuasiveness and forcefulness in speech or writing through closely reasoned logic

16\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–evolutionary, 2–revolutionary, 3–laconism, laconicism, laconicity, _or_ laconicness, 4–eloquence, 5–revolve, 6–magnate, 7–magnanimous, 8–verbal, 9–verbiage, 10–verbosity, 11–magniloquence _or_ grandiloquence, 12–garrulity, 13–volubility, 14–verbatim, 15–magnum opus, 16–cogency

***

(_End of Session 26_)

### SESSION 27

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. front and back—and uncles**

The _ventriloquist_ appears to talk from the belly (_venter, ventris_ plus _loquor_) rather than through the lips (or such was the strange perception of the person who first used the word).

_Venter, ventris_, belly, is the root on which _ventral_ (VEN′-trƏl) and _ventricle_ are built.

The _ventral_ side of an animal, for example, is the front or anterior side—the belly side.

A _ventricle_ (VEN′-trƏ-kƏl) is a hollow organ or cavity, or, logically enough, belly, as one of the two chambers of the heart, or one of the four chambers of the brain. The _ventricles_ of the heart are the lower chambers, and receive blood from the _auricles_, or upper chambers. The _auricle_ (AW′-rƏ-kƏl), so named because itis somewhat ear-shaped (Latin _auris_, ear), receives blood from the veins; the _auricles_ send the blood into the _ventricles_, which in turn pump the blood into the arteries. (It’s all very complicated, but fortunately it works.)

The adjective form of _ventricle_ is _ventricular_ (ven-TRIK′-yƏ-lƏr), which may refer to a _ventricle_, or may mean _having a belly-like bulge._

Now that you see how _ventricular_ is formed from _ventricle_, can you figure out the adjective of _auricle?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. How about the adjective of _vehicle?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Of _circle?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

No doubt you wrote _auricular_ (aw-RIK′-yƏ-lƏr), _vehicular_, and _circular_, and have discovered that nouns ending in -_cle_ from adjectives ending in -_cular._

So you can now be the first person on your block to figure out the adjective derived from:

clavicle:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

cuticle:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

vesicle:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

testicle:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

uncle:    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The answers of course are _clavicular, cuticular, vesicular, testicular_—and for _uncle_ you have every right to shout “No fair!” (But where is it written that life is fair?)

The Latin word for _uncle_ (actually, uncle on the mother’s side) is _avunculus_, from which we get _avuncular_ (Ə-VUNG′-kyƏ-lƏr), referring to an uncle.

Now what about an uncle? Well, traditional or stereotypical uncles are generally kindly, permissive, indulgent, protective—and often give helpful advice. So anyone who exhibits one or more of such traits to another (usually younger) person is _avuncular_ or acts in an _avuncular_ capacity.

So, at long last, to _get_ back to _ventral._ If there’s a front or belly side, anatomically, there must be a reverse—a back side. This is the _dorsal_ (DAWR′-sƏl) side, from Latin _dorsum_, the root on which the verb _endorse_ (en-DAWRS′) is built.

If you _endorse_ a check, you sign it on the back side; if you _endorse_ a plan, an idea, etc., you _back_ it, you express your approval or support. The noun is _endorsement_ (en-DAWRS′-mƏnt).

**2. the noise and the fury**

_Vociferous_ derives from Latin _vox, vocis_, voice (a root you met in Chapter 9), plus _fero_, to bear or carry. A _vociferous_ rejoinder carries a lot of voice—i.e., it is vehement, loud, noisy, clamorous, shouting. The noun is _vociferousness_ (vō-SIF′-Ə-rƏs-nƏs); the verb is to _vociferate_ (vō-SIF′-Ə-rayt′). Can you form the noun derived from the verb? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**3. to sleep or not to sleep—that is the question**

The root _fero_ is found also in _somniferous_ (som-NIF′-Ə-rƏs), carrying, bearing, or bringing sleep. So a _somniferous_ lecture is so dull and boring that it is sleep-inducing.

_Fero_ is combined with _somnus_, sleep, in _somniferous._ (The suffix -_ous_ indicates what part of speech? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.)

Tack on the negative prefix _in_- to _somnus_ to construct _insomnia_ (in-SOM′-nee-Ə), the abnormal inability to fall asleep when sleep is required or desired. The unfortunate victim of this disability is an _insomniac_ (in-SOM′-nee-ak), the adjective is _insomnious_ (in-SOM′-nee-Əs). (So -_ous_, in case you could not answer the question in the preceding paragraph, is an _adjective_ suffix.)

Add a different adjective suffix to _somnus_ to derive _somnolent_ (SOM′-nƏ-lƏnt), sleepy, drowsy. Can you construct the noun form of _somnolent? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ or\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_._

Combine _somnus_ with _ambulo_, to walk, and you have _somnambulism_ (som-NAM′-byƏ-liz-Əm), walking in one’s sleep. With your increasing skill in using etymology to form words, write the term for the person who is a sleepwalker.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Now add to the word you wrote a two-letter adjective suffix we have learned, to form the adjective: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**4. a walkaway**

An _ambulatory_ (AM′-byƏ-lƏ-taw′-ree) patient, as in a hospital or convalescent home, is finally well enough to get out of bed and walk around. A _perambulator_ (pƏ-RAM′-byƏ-lay′-tƏr), a word used more in England than in the United States, and often shortened to _pram_, is a baby carriage, a vehicle for walking an infant through the streets (_per_-, through). To _perambulate_ (pƏ-RAM′-byƏ-layt′) is, etymologically, “to walk through”; hence, to stroll around. Can you write the noun form of this verb? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To _amble_ (AM′-bƏl) is to walk aimlessly; an _ambulance_ is so called because originally it was composed of two stretcher-bearers who _walked_ off the battlefield with a wounded soldier; and a _preamble_ (PREE′-am-bƏl) is, by etymology, something that “walks before” (_pre_-, before, beforehand), hence an introduction or introductory statement, as the _preamble_ to the U. S. Constitution (“We the people …”), a _preamble_ to the speech, etc; or any event that is introductory or preliminary to another, as in “An increase in inflationary factors in the economy is often a _preamble_ to a drop in the stock market.”

**5. back to sleep**

_Somnus_ is one Latin word for sleep—_sopor_ is another. A _soporific_ (sop′-Ə-RIF′-ik) lecture, speaker, style of delivery, etc. will put the audience to sleep (_fic_- from _facio_, to make), and a _soporific_ is a sleeping pill.

**6. noun suffixes**

You know that -_ness_ can be added to any adjective to construct the noun form. Write the noun derived from _inarticulate: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Inarticulate_ is a combination of the negative prefix _in_- and Latin _articulus_, a joint. The _inarticulate_ person has trouble joining words together coherently. If you are quite _articulate_ (ahr-TIK′-yƏ-lƏt), on the other hand, you join your words together easily, you are verbal, vocal, possibly evenvoluble. The verb to _articulate_ (ahr-TIK′-yƏ-layt′) is to join (words), i.e., to express your vocal sounds—as in “Please _articulate_ more clearly.” Can you write the noun derived from the verb _articulate?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Another, and very common, noun suffix attached to adjectives is, as you have discovered, -_ity._ So the noun form of _banal_ is either _banalness_, or, more commonly, _banality_ (bƏ-NAL′-Ə-tee).

Bear in mind, then, that -_ness_ and -_ity_ are common noun suffixes attached to adjectives, and -_ion_ (or -_ation_) is a noun suffix frequenty affixed to verbs (to _articulate—articulation;_ to _vocalize—vocalization;_ to _perambulate—perambulation_).

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                              | MEANING                       |
| ------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
|   1. _venter, ventris_                            | belly                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   2. _loquor_                                     | to speak                      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   3. _auris_                                      | ear                           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   4. _avunculus_                                  | uncle                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   5. _dorsum_                                     | back                          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   6. _vox, vocis_                                 | voice                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   7. _fero_                                       | to carry, bear                |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   8. _somnus_                                     | sleep                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
|   9. -_ous_                                       | adjective suffix              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 10. _in_-                                         | negative suffix               |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 11. _ambulo_                                      | to walk                       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 12. -_ory_                                        | adjective suffix              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 13. _per_-                                        | through                       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 14. _pre_-                                        | before, beforehand            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 15. _sopor_                                       | sleep                         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 16. _fic_- (_facio_)                              | to make or do                 |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 17. -_ness_                                       | noun suffix                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 18. -_ity_                                        | noun suffix                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 19. -_ion_ (-_ation_)                             | noun suffix attached to verbs |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 20. -_ent_                                        | adjective suffix              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |
| 21. -_ence, -ency_                                | noun suffix                   |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                               |

#### USING THE WORDS <a href="#page268" id="page268"></a>

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _ventral_       | VEN′-trƏl           |
| -------------------- | ------------------- |
|   2. _ventricle_     | VEN′-trƏ-kƏl        |
|   3. _auricle_       | AWR′-Ə-kƏl          |
|   4. _ventricular_   | ven-TRIK′-yƏ-lƏr    |
|   5. _auricular_     | aw-RIK′-yƏ-lƏr      |
|   6. _avuncular_     | Ə-VUNG′-kyƏ-lƏr     |
|   7. _dorsal_        | DAWR′-sƏl           |
|   8. _endorse_       | en-DAWRS′           |
|   9. _endorsement_   | en-DAWRS′-mƏnt      |
| 10. _vociferousness_ | vō-SIF′-Ə-rƏs-nƏs   |
| 11. _vociferate_     | vō-SIF′-Ə-rayt′     |
| 12. _vociferation_   | vō-sif′-Ə-RAY′-shƏn |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _somniferous_   | som-NIF′-Ər-Əs        |
| -------------------- | --------------------- |
|   2. _insomnia_      | in-SOM′-nee-Ə         |
|   3. _insomniac_     | in-SOM′-nee-ak′       |
|   4. _insomnious_    | in-SOM′-nee-Əs        |
|   5. _somnolent_     | SOM′-nƏ-lƏnt          |
|   6. _somnolence_    | SOM′-nƏ-lƏns          |
|   7. _somnolency_    | SOM′-nƏ-lƏn-see       |
|   8. _somnambulism_  | som-NAM′-byƏ-liz-Əm   |
|   9. _somnambulist_  | som-NAM′-byƏ-list     |
| 10. _somnambulistic_ | som-nam′-byƏ-LIST′-ik |

**Can you pronounce the words? (III)**

|   1. _ambulatory_       | AM′-byƏ-lƏ-tawr′-ee     |
| ----------------------- | ----------------------- |
|   2. _perambulator_     | pƏ-RAM′-byƏ-lay′-tƏr    |
|   3. _perambulate_      | pƏ-RAM′-byƏ-layt′       |
|   4. _perambulation_    | pƏ-ram′-byƏ-LAY′-shƏn   |
|   5. _amble_            | AM′-bƏl                 |
|   6. _preamble_         | PREE′-am-bƏl            |
| 7. _soporific_          | sop-Ə-RIF′-ik           |
|   8. _inarticulateness_ | in′-ahr-TIK′-yƏ-lƏt-nƏs |
|   9. _articulate_       | ahr-TIK′-yƏ-lƏt         |
| 10. _banality_          | bƏ-NAL′-Ə-tee           |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. ventral                  | a. unable to fall asleep                          |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. dorsal                 | b. pertaining to sleepwalking                     |
|   3. somniferous            | c. drowsy                                         |
|   4. insomnious             | d. able to walk, after being bedridden            |
|   5. somnolent              | e. verbal, vocal                                  |
|   6. somnambulistic         | f. like an uncle; kindly; protective              |
|   7. ambulatory             | g. pertaining to one of the chambers of the heart |
|   8. articulate             | h. referring to the front or belly side           |
|   9. ventricular, auricular | i. sleep-inducing                                 |
| 10. avuncular               | j. referring to the back side                     |

***

KEY:  1–h, 2–j, 3–i, 4–a, 5–c, 6–b, 7–d, 8–e, 9–g, 10–f

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. ventricle, auricle | a. inability to fall asleep                             |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. endorsement      | b. sleepwalking                                         |
|   3. vociferousness   | c. introduction; preliminary or introductory occurrence |
|   4. insomnia         | d. incoherence; sputtering; inability to get words out  |
|   5. somnolence       | e. chamber of the heart                                 |
|   6. somnambulism     | f. sleeping pill                                        |
|   7. perambulator     | g. support; approval                                    |
|   8. preamble         | h. lack of originality; lack of imagination             |
|   9. soporific        | i. drowsiness                                           |
| 10. inarticulateness  | j. baby buggy; stroller                                 |
| 11. banality          | k. loudness; clamorousness                              |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–g, 3–k, 4–a, 5–i, 6–b, 7–j, 8–c, 9–f, 10–d, 11–h

***

**Can you work with the words? (III)**

| 1. endorse      | a. one who cannot fall asleep               |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| 2. vociferate   | b. sleepwalker                              |
| 3. insomniac    | c. walk aimlessly                           |
| 4. somnolency   | d. stroll through; walk around              |
| 5. somnambulist | e. to sign on the back; support; approve of |
| 6. perambulate  | f. drowsiness                               |
| 7. amble        | g. say loudly and with great vehemence      |
| 8. soporific    | h. causing sleep                            |
| 9. insomnious   | i. wakeful; unable to fall asleep           |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–g, 3–a, 4–f, 5–b, 6–d, 7–c, 8–h, 9–i

***

**Do you understand the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Does an _insomniac_ often need a _soporific?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Does a _somnambulist_ always stay in bed when asleep?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Are _ambulatory_ patients bedridden?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Does a _preamble_ come after another event?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Are _articulate_ people verbal?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Does _banality_ show creativeness?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Does an _avuncular_ attitude indicate affection and protectiveness?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is _vociferation_ habitual with quiet, shy people?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Is a _somnolent_ person wide awake?

YES      NO

10.Is a _somniferous_ speaker stimulating and exciting?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–no, 4–no, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–yes, 8–no, 9–no, 10–no

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. lack of imagination or originality in speech, actions, or style of life; hackneyed or trite phraseology

&#x20; 1\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. sleep-inducing

&#x20; 2\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. unable to fall asleep (_adj._)

&#x20; 3\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. verbal, vocal, speaking fluently

&#x20; 4\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. acting like an uncle

&#x20; 5\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. referring to the front; anterior

&#x20; 6\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. referring to the back; posterior

&#x20; 7\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. approve of; support; sign on the back of

&#x20; 8\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. shout vehemently

&#x20; 9\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. one who cannot fall asleep

10\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. drowsy; sleepy

11\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. sleepwalker

12\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. now able to walk, though previously bedridden

13\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. walk aimlessly

14\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. introduction; introductory event

15\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16\. incoherence

16\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–banality, 2–somniferous _or_ soporific, 3–insomnious, 4–articulate, 5–avuncular, 6–ventral, 7–dorsal, 8–endorse, 9–vociferate, 10–insomniac, 11–somnolent, 12–somnambulist, 13–ambulatory, 14–amble, 15–preamble, 16–inarticulateness

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW <a href="#page272" id="page272"></a>

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Disinclined to conversation:

(a) loquacious, (b) laconic, (c) taciturn

&#x20; 2\. Trite:

(a) inarticulate, (b) banal, (c) verbose

&#x20; 3\. Rapid and fluent:

(a) voluble, (b) verbose, (c) garrulous

&#x20; 4\. Forceful and compelling:

(a) vociferous, (b) cogent, (c) laconic

&#x20; 5\. Unspoken:

(a) verbatim, (b) eloquent, (c) tacit

&#x20; 6\. Using elegant and impressive words:

(a) verbose, (b) grandiloquent, (c) colloquial

&#x20; 7\. Back:

(a) dorsal, (b) ventral, (c) somniferous

&#x20; 8\. Sleep-inducing:

(a) soporific, (b) somnolent, (c) ventral

&#x20; 9\. Inability to fall asleep:

(a) somnambulism, (b) ambulatory, (c) insomnia

10\. Talkativeness:

(a) reticence, (b) ventriloquism, (c) loquacity

11\. Expressing indirectly or in a roundabout way:

(a) circumlocutory, (b) colloquial, (c) laconic

12\. Elegance in expression:

(a) magniloquence, (b) grandiloquence, (c) verbiage

13\. Wordiness:

(a) laconism, (b) cogency, (c) verbosity

14\. Big-hearted, generous, unselfish:

(a) grandiloquent, (b) magnanimous, (c) garrulous

15\. Causing radical changes:

(a) evolutionary, (b) revolutionary, (c) ventricular

16\. To shout vehemently:

(a) endorse, (b) perambulate, (c) vociferate

17\. Like an uncle:

(a) ventricular, (b) auricular, (c) avuncular

18\. Drowsy:

(a) somniferous, (b) somnolent, (c) soporific

19\. Sleepwalking:

(a) insomnia, (b) somnolency, (c) somnambulism

20\. Introduction:

(a) preamble, (b) perambulator, (c) evolution

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–b, 3–a, 4–b, 5–c, 6–b, 7–a, 8–a, 9–c, 10–c, 11–a, 12–a _and_ b, 13–c, 14–b, 15–b, 16–c, 17–c, 18–b, 19–c, 20–a

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| ROOT                    | MEANING                            |
| ----------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _taceo_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   taciturn      |                                    |
|   2. _loquor_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   loquacity     |                                    |
|   3. _solus_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   soliloquize   |                                    |
|   4. _venter, ventris_  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   ventral       |                                    |
|   5. _magnus_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   magniloquent  |                                    |
|   6. _grandis_          | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   grandiloquent |                                    |
|   7. _verbum_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   verbatim      |                                    |
|   8. _volvo, volutus_   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   revolution    |                                    |
|   9. _garrio_           | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   garrulous     |                                    |
| 10. _animus_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   magnanimous   |                                    |
| 11. _opus_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   magnum opus   |                                    |
| 12. _opero_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   operator      |                                    |
| 13. _auris_             | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   auricle       |                                    |
| 14. _avunculus_         | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   avuncular     |                                    |
| 15. _dorsum_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   dorsal        |                                    |
| 16. _vox, vocis_        | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vociferate    |                                    |
| 17. _fero_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   somniferous   |                                    |
| 18. _ambulo_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   preamble      |                                    |
| 19._sopor_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   soporific     |                                    |
| 20. _somnus_            | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   somnolency    |                                    |

***

KEY:  1–to be silent, 2–to speak, 3–alone, 4–belly, 5–big, large, great, 6–grand, 7–word, 8–to roll, 9–to chatter, 10–mind, 11–work, 12–to work, 13–ear, 14–uncle, 15–back, 16–voice, 17–to carry or bear, 18–to walk, 19–sleep, 20–sleep

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST

1\. The present participle (or -_ing_ form) of the Latin verb _opero_, to work, is _operans_, working. The form _operandi_ means _of working._ Can you figure out the literal meaning of the phrase _modus operandi_, sometimes used to signify the characteristic methods or procedures used by certain criminals? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

2\. _Circum_-, we have learned, is a prefix meaning _around_, as in _circumlocution, circumference, circumcision, circumnavigation_, etc. Thinking of the root _scribo, scriptus_, to write, can you figure out the word meaning _writing, or written material, around_ (the edge of something)? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. You know the roots _somnus_ and _loquor._ Can you combine these two roots to form an adjective meaning _talking in one’s sleep?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Can you write the noun form of this adjective? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

4\. We have discovered _auris_, ear, as in _auricle._ Can you figure out the specialty of the physician called an _aurist?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

5\. _Verbal_, from _verbum_, refers to words; _oral_, from _os, oris_, the mouth, refers to spoken words or sounds. Can you analyze _aural_ and decide on its meaning? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

6\. A _somnambulist_ walks in his sleep. What does a _noctambulist_ do? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

7\. _Soporific_, combining _sopor_, sleep, with _fic_- (from _facio_), to make, means _inducing or causing sleep._ Use _somnus_, another root for sleep, to construct a word that has the same form and meaning as _soporific:_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

8\. _Perambulate_ is _to walk through._ Use another Latin prefix to construct a verb meaning _to walk around_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(_Answers in Chapter 18_)

#### BECOMING ALERT TO NEW IDEAS

Some chapters back I suggested that since words are symbols of ideas, one of the most effective means of building your vocabulary is to read books that deal with new ideas. Along that line, I further suggested that the fields of psychology, psychiatry, and psychoanalysis would be good starting points, and I mentioned a number of exciting books to work with.

Needless to say, you will not wish to neglect other fields, and so I want to recommend, at this point, highly readable books in additional subjects. All these books will increase your familiarity with the world of ideas—all of them, therefore, will help you build a superior vocabulary.

#### SEMANTICS

_Language in Thought and Action_, by S. I. Hayakawa

_People in Quandaries_, by Wendell Johnson

#### EDUCATION AND LEARNING <a href="#page276" id="page276"></a>

_How to Survive in Your Native Land_, by James Herndon

_Education and the Endangered Individual_, by Brian V. Hill

_How Children Fail_ and _What Do I Do Monday?_, by John Holt

_Teaching Human Beings_, by Jeffrey Schrank

_Education and Ecstasy_, by George B. Leonard

_Human Teaching for Human Learning_, by George Isaac Brown

#### SEX, LOVE, MARRIAGE

_Couple Therapy_, by Gerald Walker Smith and Alice I. Phillips

_Your Fear of Love_, by Marshall Bryant Hodge

_Sexual Suicide_, by George F. Gilder

_Intimacy_, by Gina Allen and Clement G. Martin, M.D.

_How to Live with Another Person_, by David Viscott, M.D.

_Pairing_, by George R. Bach and Ronald M. Deutsch

_The Intimate Enemy_, by George R. Bach and Peter Wyden

_The Rape of the Ape_, by Allan Sherman (Humor)

_The Hite Report_, by Shere Hite

_Sex in Human Loving_, by Eric Berne, M.D.

#### WOMEN, FEMINISM, ETC.

_Rebirth of Feminism_, by Judith Hole and Ellen Levine

_The Way of All Women_, by M. Esther Harding

_Knowing Woman_, by Irene Claremont de Castillejo

_Sexist Justice_, by Karen De Crow

_Our Bodies, Our Selves_, by The Boston Women’s Health Book Collective

#### CHILDREN, CHILD-RAISING, ETC.

_Between Parent and Child_ and _Between Parent and Teenager_, by Dr. Haim Ginott

_Children Who Hate_, by Fritz Redl and David Wineman

_Parent Effectiveness Training_, by Dr. Thomas Gordon

_How to Parent_, by Dr. Fitzhugh Dodson

_Escape from Childhood_, by John Holt

_One Little Boy_, by Dorothy W. Baruch

#### HEALTH <a href="#page277" id="page277"></a>

_Save Your Life Diet Book_, by David Reuben, M.D.

_Folk Medicine_, by D. C. Jarvis, M.D.

_Get Well Naturally_, by Linda Clark

_Let’s Eat Right to Keep Fit_, by Adelle Davis

#### PHILOSOPHY

_The Way of Zen_ and _What Does It Matter?_, by Alan W. Watts

_Love’s Body_, by Norman O. Brown

#### BUSINESS, ECONOMICS, FINANCE

_The Affluent Society_, by John Kenneth Galbraith

_Parkinson’s Law_, by C. Northcote Parkinson

_The Peter Principle_, by Laurence J. Peter

_Up the Organization_, by Robert Townsend

#### SOCIOLOGY

_Passages_, by Gail Sheehy

_Future Shock_, by Alvin Toffler

_Hard Times_, by Studs Terkel

_Roots_, by Alex Haley

#### DEATH AND DYING

_Life After Life_, by Raymond A. Moody, Jr., M.D.

_On Death and Dying_, by Elizabeth Kubler Ross

All but one or two of these stimulating and informative books are available in inexpensive paperback editions—most of them can be found in any large public library. Any one of them will provide an evening of entertainment and excitement far more rewarding than watching TV, will possibly open for you new areas of knowledge and understanding, and will undoubtedly contain so many of the words you have learned in this book that you will again and again experience the delicious shock of recognition that I spoke of in an earlier chapter.

Additionally, you may encounter words you have never seen before that are built on roots you are familiar with—_and you will then realize how simple it is to figure out the probable meaning of even the most esoteric term once you have become an expert in roots, prefixes, and suffixes._

(_End of Session 27_)
