# 14

## HOW TO TALK ABOUT COMMON PHENOMENA AND OCCURRENCES

## (_Sessions 39–41_)

***

TEASER PREVIEW

What word aptly describes:

• _dire poverty?_

• _emotion experienced without direct participation?_

• _something which lasts a very short time?_

• _an inoffensive word for an unpleasant idea?_

• _light and easy banter?_

• _someone who is cowlike in his stolidity?_

• _homesickness?_

• _harsh sound?_

• _a meat-eating animal?_

• _something kept secret?_

***

### SESSION 39 <a href="#page402" id="page402"></a>

This world, Robert Louis Stevenson once claimed—with, I think, questionable logic—is so full of a number of things that we should all be as happy as kings.

I doubt very strongly that happiness comes from the outside, or that kings are necessarily happy. But I will go this far (and no further) with Stevenson: the world is certainly full of a number of things. For instance, poverty and misery, hospitals and insane asylums, slums and racial restrictions, cut-down forests and once fertile lands becoming progressively more arid, war and death and taxes and bumbling diplomats. I know that Stevenson had a different sort of thing in mind, for romantic poets tend to view the world through rose-tinted spectacles, but it is often necessary to counter one extreme with another—and I simply wish to set the record straight.

In this chapter we are going to discuss a number of things to be found in the world and in the minds of its inhabitants—poverty and wealth; secondhand emotions; the relativity of time; praise of various sorts; small talk and how to indulge in it; animals; longings for the past; sounds; eating habits; and many kinds and conditions of secrecy.

As you see, when you start exploring ideas, as we constantly do in these chapters, you never know what will turn up.

#### IDEAS

**1. for want of the green stuff**

There are those people who are forced (often through no fault of their own) to pursue an existence not only devoid of such luxuries as radios, television sets, sunken bathtubs, electric orange-juice squeezers, automobiles, Jacuzzis, private swimming pools,etc., but lacking also in many of the pure necessities of living—sufficient food, heated homes, hot water, vermin- and rodent-free surroundings, decent clothing, etc.

Such people live:

in _penury_

**2. at least watch it**

All normal people want and need love and at least a modicum of excitement in their lives—so say the psychologists. If no one loves them, and if they can find no one on whom to lavish their own love, they may often satisfy their emotional longings and needs by getting their feelings secondhand—through reading love stories, attending motion pictures, watching soap operas, etc.

These are:

_vicarious_ feelings

**3. time is fleeting**

During the late winter and early spring of 1948–49, great numbers of people went practically berserk joining and forming “pyramid clubs.” If you have not heard of this amazing phenomenon, I won’t attempt to describe it in any of its multifarious ramifications, but the main point was that you paid two dollars, treated some people to coffee and doughnuts, and shortly thereafter (if you were gullible enough to fall for this get-rich-quick scheme) supposedly received a return of some fantastic amount like $2,064 for your investment.

For a short time, pyramid clubs were a rage—soon they had vanished from the American scene.

Anything that lasts for but a short time and leaves no trace is:

_ephemeral_

**4. how not to call a spade…**

Words are only _symbols_ of things—they are not the things themselves. (This, by the way, is one of the basic tenets of semantics.)But many people identify the word and the thing so closely that they fear to use certain words that symbolize things that are unpleasant to them.

I know that this is confusing, so let me illustrate.

Words having to do with death, sex, certain portions of the anatomy, excretion, etc. are avoided by certain people.

These people prefer circumlocutions—words that “talk around” an idea or that mean or imply something but don’t come right out and say so directly.

For example:

| WORD                    | CIRCUMLOCUTION                                                                                                  |
| ----------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| _die_                   | expire; depart this life; pass away; leave this vale of tears                                                   |
| _sexual intercourse_    | (intimate) relations; “playing house”; “shacking up”                                                            |
| _prostitute_            | lady of the evening; _fille de joie;_ painted woman; lady of easy virtue; _fille de nuit;_ streetwalker; hooker |
| _house of prostitution_ | house of ill-fame; bawdyhouse; house of ill-repute; bagnio; brothel; bordello; “house”; “massage parlor”        |
| _buttocks, behind_      | derrière; rear end; butt; tail                                                                                  |
| _breasts_               | bosom; bust; curves                                                                                             |
| _toilet_                | powder room; little girl’s room; facilities; washroom; lavatory; head                                           |

The left-hand column is the direct, non-pussyfooting word. The right-hand column is made up of:

_euphemisms_

**5. small talk**

“Whenever I’m in the dumps, I get a new suit.”

“Oh, so that’s where you get them!”

“Lend me a dime—I want to phone one of my friends.”

“Here’s a quarter—call them all.”

“The doctor says I have snoo in my blood!”

“Snoo? What’s snoo?”

“Not a darn! What’s new with you?”

“What are twins?”

“Okay, what are twins?”

“Womb mates!”

“I took a twip yesterday.”

“A twip?”

“Yes, I took a twip on a twain!”

These are examples of:

_badinage_

**6. everything but give milk**

You’ve seen a cow contentedly munching its cud. Nothing seems capable of disturbing this animal—and the animal seems to want nothing more out of life than to lead a simple, vegetable existence.

Some people are like a cow—calm, patient, placid, phlegmatic, vegetable-like. They are:

_bovine_<sup>1</sup>

**7. good old days**

Do you sometimes experience a keen, almost physical, longing for associations or places of the past?

When you pass the neighborhood in which you were born and where you spent your early years, do you have a sharp, strange reaction, almost akin to mild nausea?

When you are away from home and friends and family, do pleasant remembrances crowd in on your mind to the point where your present loneliness becomes almost unbearable, and you actually feel a little sick?

This common feeling is called:

_nostalgia_

**8. sounds that grate**

Some sounds are so harsh, grating, and discordant that they offend the ear. They lack all sweetness, harmony, pleasantness. Traffic noises of a big city, electronic rock music, chalk squeaking on a blackboard.…

Such blaring, ear-splitting, or spine-tingling sounds are called:

_cacophonous_

**9. eating habits**

Lions, tigers, wolves, and some other mammals subsist entirely on flesh. No spinach, salad greens, whole-wheat cereals, sugar, or spices—just good, red meat.

These mammals are:

_carnivorous_

**10. private and public**

There are certain things most of us do in private, like taking a bath. Some people like to engage in other activities in complete privacy—eating, reading, watching TV, sleeping, for example.

The point is that, while these activities may be conducted in privacy, there is never any reason for keeping them secret.

But there are other activities that are kept not only private, but well-shrouded in secrecy and concealed from public knowledge. These activities are unethical, illegal, or unsafe—like having an affair with someone whose spouse is your best friend, betraying military secrets to the enemy, trading in narcotics, bribing public officials, etc.

Arrangements, activities, or meetings that fall under this category are called:

_clandestine_

#### USING THE WORDS <a href="#page407" id="page407"></a>

**Can you pronounce the words?**

|   1. _penury_      | PEN′-yƏ-ree     |
| ------------------ | --------------- |
|   2. _vicarious_   | vī-KAĪR′-ee-Əs  |
|   3. _ephemeral_   | Ə-FEM′-Ə-rƏl    |
|   4. _euphemism_   | Y′-fƏ-miz-Əm    |
|   5. _badinage_    | BAD′-Ə-nƏj      |
|   6. _bovine_      | BŌ′-vīn′        |
|   7. _nostalgia_   | nƏ-STAL′-jƏ     |
|   8. _cacophony_   | kƏ-KOF′-Ə-nee   |
|   9. _carnivorous_ | kahr-NIV′-Ər-Əs |
| 10. _clandestine_  | klan-DES′-tin   |

**Can you work with the words?**

| 1. penury        | a. impermanent             |
| ---------------- | -------------------------- |
|   2. vicarious   | b. banter                  |
|   3. ephemeral   | c. homesickness            |
|   4. euphemism   | d. meat-eating             |
|   5. badinage    | e. circumlocution          |
|   6. bovine      | f. harsh noise             |
|   7. nostalgia   | g. poverty                 |
|   8. cacophony   | h. secret                  |
|   9. carnivorous | i. placid; stolid; cowlike |
| 10. clandestine  | j. secondhand              |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–j, 3–a, 4–e, 5–b, 6–i, 7–c, 8–f, 9–d, 10–h

***

**Do you understand the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. Do wealthy people normally live in _penury?_

YES      NO

2\. Is a _vicarious_ thrill one that comes from direct participation?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. Do _ephemeral_ things last a very short time?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Is a _euphemism_ the substitution of an inoffensive term for another of the same meaning that may sound offensive, vulgar, or indelicate?

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Does _badinage_ show lighthearted frivolity?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Are _bovine_ people high-strung and nervous?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Does one get a feeling of _nostalgia_ for past occurrences and relationships?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is _cacophony_ pleasant and musical?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Do _carnivorous_ animals eat meat?

YES      NO

10\. Is a _clandestine_ meeting conducted in secrecy?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–no, 3–yes, 4–yes, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–yes, 8–no, 9–yes, 10–yes

***

**Do you understand the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. penury—affluence

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 2\. vicarious—actual

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 3\. ephemeral—eternal

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 4\. euphemism—less offensive word

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 5\. badinage—light, teasing talk

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 6\. bovine—high-strung

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 7\. nostalgia—longing for the past

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 8\. cacophony—euphony

SAME      OPPOSITE

&#x20; 9\. carnivorous—herbivorous

SAME      OPPOSITE

10\. clandestine—hidden

SAME      OPPOSITE

***

KEY:  1–O, 2–O, 3–O, 4–S, 5–S, 6–O, 7–O, 8–O, 9–O, 10–S

***

(The new words used in this test will be discussed in later sections of this chapter.)

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. harsh sound

&#x20; 1\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. having a short life

&#x20; 2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. dire poverty

&#x20; 3\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. substitution of an indirect or pleasant word or phrase for a possibly offensive one of the same meaning

&#x20; 4\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. experienced as a spectator, rather than as a participant

&#x20; 5\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. acute feeling of homesickness

&#x20; 6\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. light, half-teasing banter

&#x20; 7\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. subsisting solely on meat

&#x20; 8\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. cowlike; stolid

&#x20; 9\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. secret; concealed

10\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–cacophony, 2–ephemeral, 3–penury, 4–euphemism, 5–vicarious, 6–nostalgia, 7–badinage, 8–carnivorous, 9–bovine, 10–clandestine

***

(_End of Session 39_)

### SESSION 40

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. money, and what it will buy**

The modern world operates largely by means of a price structure—wealth and poverty are therefore words that indicate thepossession, on the one hand, or the lack, on the other, of money. _Penury_, from Latin _penuria_, need, neediness, is dire, abject poverty, complete lack of financial resources. It is one of the two strongest English words there are to denote absence of money. The adjective form, _penurious_ (pƏ-NYr′-ee-Əs _or_ pƏ-NR′ ee-Əs), strangely enough, _may_ mean _poverty-stricken_, but more commonly signifies _stingy, close-fisted, niggardly;_ so sparing in the use of money as to give the appearance of _penury._

_Penurious_ is a synonym of _parsimonious_ (pahr′-sƏ-MŌ′-nee-Əs), but is much stronger in implication. A _parsimonious_ person is stingy; a _penurious_ person is twice as stingy. _Penury_, then, is poverty; _penuriousness_ is stinginess, excessive frugality. The noun form of _parsimonious_ is _parsimony_ (PAHR′-sƏ-mō′-nee).

A somewhat milder word than _penury_ for poverty (if you can imagine a mild degree of poverty) is _indigence_ (IN′-dƏ-jƏns). _Indigent_ (IN′-dƏ-jƏnt) people are not absolutely penniless—they are simply living in reduced circumstances, forgoing many creature comforts, forced to undergo the type of hardships that may accompany a lack of sufficient funds.

On the other hand, a close synonym of _penury_, and one of equal strength, is _destitution_ (des′-tƏ-T′-shƏn). _Destitute_ (DES′-tƏ-tt) people do not even have the means for mere subsistence—as such, they are perhaps on the verge of starvation. _Penury_ and _destitution_ are not merely straitened circumstances—they are downright desperate circumstances.

To turn now to the brighter side of the picture, the possession of money, especially in increasing amounts, is expressed by _affluence_ (AF′-l-Əns). _Affluent_ (AF′-l-Ənt) people, people of _affluence_, or those living in _affluent_ circumstances, are more than comfortable; in addition, there is the implication that their wealth is increasing. People who live in _affluence_ probably own large and costly homes, run big, new cars, belong to expensive golf or country clubs, etc.

A much stronger term is _opulence_ (OP′-yƏ-lƏns), which not only implies much greater wealth than _affluence_, but in addition suggests lavish expenditures and ostentatiously luxurious surroundings. People of _opulence_ own estates; drive only outrageously expensive and specially equipped cars (Rolls-Royces, Mercedes-Benzes, Porsches, etc.); have a corps of servants, includinga major-domo; belong to golf and yacht and country clubs, etc., etc. Embroider the fantasy as much as you wish to. _Opulent_ (OP′-yƏ-lƏnt) may describe people, surroundings, styles of life, or the like.

_Affluent_ is a combination of the prefix _ad_-, to, toward (changing to _af_- before a root beginning with _f_), plus the Latin verb _fluo_, to flow—_affluence_ is that delightful condition in which money keeps flowing to us, and no one ever turns off the spigot. Other words from the same root, _fluo_, to flow, are _fluid, influence, confluence_ (a “flowing together”), _fluent_ (the words flow smoothly), etc.

_Opulent_ is from Latin _opulentus_, wealthy. No other English words derive from this root.

**2. doing and feeling**

If you watch a furious athletic event, and _you_ get tired, though the athletes expend all the energy—that’s _vicarious_ fatigue.

If your friend goes on a bender, and as you watch him absorb one drink after another, _you_ begin to feel giddy and stimulated, that’s _vicarious_ intoxication.

If you watch a mother in a motion picture or dramatic play suffer horribly at the death of her child, and _you_ go through the same agony, that’s _vicarious_ torment.

You can experience an emotion, then, in two ways: firsthand, through actual participation; or _vicariously_, by becoming empathetically involved in another person’s feelings.

Some people, for example, lead essentially dull and colorless lives. Through their children, through reading or attending the theater, however, they can experience all the emotions felt by others whose lives move along at a swift, exciting pace. These people live at second hand; they live _vicariously._

**3. time is relative**

Elephants and turtles live almost forever; human beings in the United States have a life expectancy in general of sixty-eight to seventy-six years (though the gradual conquest of disease is constantlylengthening our span);<sup>2</sup> dogs live from seven to ten years; and some insects exist for only a few hours or days.

One such short-lived creature is the dayfly, which in Greek was called _ephemera._ Hence anything so short-lived, so unenduring that it scarcely seems to outlast the day, may be called _ephemeral._

A synonym of _ephemeral_ is _evanescent_ (ev-Ə-NES′-Ənt), fleeting, staying for a remarkably short time, vanishing. Something intangible, like a feeling, may be called _evanescent;_ it’s here, and before you can quite comprehend it, it’s gone—vanished.

The noun is _evanescence_ (ev′-Ə-NES′-Əns); the verb is to _evanesce_ (ev-Ə-NES′).

_Evanescent_ is built on the prefix _e_- (_ex_-), out, the root _vanesco_, to vanish, and the adjective suffix -_ent._

The suffix -_esce_ often, but not always, means _begin to. -Escent_ may mean _becoming_ or _beginning to._ Thus:

_adolescent_—beginning to grow up;

beginning to become an adult

_evanesce_—begin to vanish

_convalesce_—begin to get well after illness

_putrescent_—beginning to rot;

beginning to become putrid

_obsolescent_—becoming obsolete

**4. an exploration of various good things**

A _euphemism_ is a word or expression that has been substituted for another that is likely to offend—it is built on the Greek prefix _eu_-, good, the root _pheme_, voice, and the noun suffix -_ism._ (Etymologically, “something said in a good voice!”) Adjective: _euphemistic_ (y′-fƏ-MIS′-tik)

Other English words constructed from the prefix _eu_-:

1\. _euphony_ (YOO′-fƏ-nee)—good sound; pleasant lilt or rhythm (_phone_, sound)

Adjective: _euphonic_ (y-FON′-ik) or _euphonious_ (y-FŌ′-nee-Əs)

2\. _eulogy_ (Y′-lƏ-jee)—etymologically, “good speech”; a formal speech of praise, usually delivered as a funeral oration. _Logos_ in this term means _word_ or _speech_, as it did in _philology_ (Chapter 6). _Logos_ more commonly means _science_ or _study_, but has the alternate meaning in _eulogy, philology, monologue, dialogue, epilogue_ (words upon the other words, or “after-words”), and _prologue_ (words before the main part, “before-words,” or introduction).

Adjective: _eulogistic_ (y-lƏ-JIS′-tik); verb: _eulogize_ (Y-lƏ-jīz′); person who delivers a _eulogy: eulogist_ (Y-lƏ-jist)

3\. _euphoria_ (y-FAWR′-ee-Ə)—good feeling, a sense of mental buoyancy and physical well-being

Adjective: _euphoric_ (y-FAWR′-ik)

4\. _euthanasia_ (y′-thƏ-NAY′-zhƏ)—etymologically, “good death”; method of painless death inflicted on people suffering from incurable diseases—not legal at the present time, but advocated by many people. The word derives from _eu_- plus Greek _thanatos_, death.

**5. exploration of modes of expression**

_Badinage_ is a half-teasing, non-malicious, frivolous banter, intended to amuse rather than wound. _Badinage_ has a close synonym, _persiflage_ (PUR′-sƏ-flahzh′), which is a little more derisive, a trifle more indicative of contempt or mockery—but still totally unmalicious.

In line with _badinage_ and _persiflage_, there are four other forms of expression you should be familiar with: _cliché_ (klee-SHAY′), _bromide_ (BRŌ′-mīd′), _platitude_ (PLAT′-Ə-td), and _anodyne_ (AN′-Ə-dīn′).

A _cliché_ is a pattern of words which was once new and fresh, but which now is so old, worn, and threadbare that only banal, unimaginative speakers and writers ever use it. Examples are: _fast and furious; unsung heroes; by leaps and bounds; conspicuous by its absence; green with envy;_ etc. The most devastating criticism you can make of a piece of writing is to say, “It is full of _clichés_”; the most pointed insult to a person’s way of talking is, “You speak in _clichés._”

A _bromide_ is any trite, dull, and probably fallacious remark that shows little evidence of original thinking, and that therefore convinces a listener of the total absence of perspicacity on the part of the speaker.

For instance, some cautious, dull-minded individual might warn you not to take a chance in these words: “Remember it’s better to be safe than sorry!”

Your sneering response might be: “Oh, that old _bromide!_”

A _platitude_ is similar to a _cliché_ or _bromide_, in that it is a dull, trite, hackneyed, unimaginative pattern of words—but, to add insult to injury (_cliché_), the speaker uses it with an air of novelty—as if he just made it up, and isn’t he the brilliant fellow!

An _anodyne_, in the medical sense, is a drug that allays pain without curing an illness, like aspirin or morphine. Figuratively, an _anodyne_ is a statement made to allay someone’s fears or anxieties, not believed by the speaker, but intended to be believed by the listener. “Prosperity is just around the corner” was a popular _anodyne_ of the 1930s.

A _bromide_ is also a drug, formerly used as a sedative. Sedatives dull the senses—the statement labeled a _bromide_ comes from a speaker of dull wit and has a sedative effect on the listener. The adjective is _bromidic_ (brō-MID′-ik), as in “his _bromidic_ way of expressing himself.”

_Platitude_ derives from Greek _platys_, broad or flat, plus the noun suffix -_tude._ Words like _plateau_ (flat land), _plate_ and _platter_ (flat dishes), and _platypus_ (flat foot) all derive from the same root as _platitude_, a flat statement, i.e., one that falls flat, despite the speaker’s high hopes for it. The adjective is _platitudinous_ (plat′-Ə-T-dƏ-nƏs), as in, “What a _platitudinous_ remark.”

_Anodyne_ is a combination of the negative prefix _an_- with Greek _odyne_, pain. _Anodynes_, as drugs, lessen pain; as statements, they are intended to reduce or eliminate emotional pain or anxiety.

#### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                      | MEANING          |
| ----------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
|   1. _penuria_                            | need, neediness  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   2. _ad_- (_af_-)                        | to, toward       |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   3. _fluo_                               | to flow          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 4. _opulentus_                            | wealthy          |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   5. _ephemera_                           | dayfly           |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   6. _e-, ex_-                            | out              |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   7. _vanesco_                            | to vanish        |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   8. -_esce_                              | begin to         |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
|   9. -_ent_                               | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 10. -_ence_                               | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 11. _eu_-                                 | good             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 12. _pheme_                               | voice            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 13. -_ism_                                | noun suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 14. _phone_                               | sound            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 15. -_ic_                                 | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 16. -_ous_                                | adjective suffix |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 17. _logos_                               | word, speech     |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 18. -_ize_                                | verb suffix      |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 19. _thanatos_                            | death            |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 20. _platys_                              | broad or flat    |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 21. _an_-                                 | negative prefix  |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |
| 22. _odyne_                               | pain             |
| ENGLISH WORD   \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                  |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _penurious_     | pƏ-NYR′-ee-Əs  or  pƏ-NR′-ee-Əs                          |
| -------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
|   2. _penuriousness_ | pƏ-NYR′-ee-Əs-nƏs  or  pƏ-NR′-ee-Əs-nƏs                  |
|   3. _parsimonious_  | pahr′-sƏ-MŌ′-nee-Əs                                      |
|   4. _parsimony_     | PAHR′-sƏ-mō′-nee                                         |
|   5. _indigence_     | IN′-dƏ-jƏns                                              |
|   6. _indigent_      | IN′-dƏ-jƏnt                                              |
|   7. _destitution_   | des′-tƏ-T′-shƏn                                          |
|   8. _destitute_     | DES′-tƏ-tt                                               |
|   9. _affluence_     | AF′-l-Əns                                                |
| 10. _affluent_       | AF′-l-Ənt                                                |
| 11. _opulence_       | OP′-yƏ-lƏns                                              |
| 12. _opulent_        | OP′-yƏ-lƏnt                                              |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _evanescent_  | ev′-Ə-NES′-Ənt |
| ------------------ | -------------- |
|   2. _evanescence_ | ev′-Ə-NES′-Əns |
|   3. _evanesce_    | ev′-Ə-NES′     |
|   4. _euphemistic_ | y-fƏ-MIS′-tik  |
|   5. _euphony_     | YOO′-fƏ-nee    |
|   6. _euphonic_    | y-FON′-ik      |
|   7. _euphonious_  | y-FŌ′-nee-Əs   |
|   8. _eulogy_      | YOO′-lƏ-jee    |
|   9. _eulogistic_  | y′-lƏ-JIS′-tik |
| 10. _eulogize_     | Y′-lƏ-jīz′     |

**Can you pronounce the words? (III)**

|   1. _euphoria_      | y-FAWR′-ee-Ə        |
| -------------------- | ------------------- |
|   2. _euphoric_      | y-FAWR′-ik          |
|   3. _euthanasia_    | y′-thƏ-NAY′-zha     |
|   4. _persiflage_    | PUR′-sƏ-flahzh′     |
|   5. _cliché_        | klee-SHAY′          |
|   6. _bromide_       | BRŌ′-mīd′           |
|   7. _bromidic_      | brō-MID′-ik         |
|   8. _platitude_     | PLAT′-Ə-td          |
|   9. _platitudinous_ | plat′-Ə-TOO′-dƏ-nƏs |
| 10. _anodyne_        | AN′-Ə-dīn′          |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. penurious     | a. poor; of limited means |
| ---------------- | ------------------------- |
| 2. indigent      | b. inoffensive            |
| 3. affluent      | c. flat, trite            |
| 4. evanescent    | d. feeling tiptop         |
| 5. euphemistic   | e. wealthy                |
| 6. euphonious    | f. pleasant in sound      |
| 7. euphoric      | g. stingy; tight-fisted   |
| 8. platitudinous | h. fleeting               |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–a, 3–e, 4–h, 5–b, 6–f, 7–d, 8–c

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. parsimony   | a. lavish luxury         |
| -------------- | ------------------------ |
| 2. destitution | b. painless death        |
| 3. opulence    | c. pleasant sound        |
| 4. evanescence | d. trite remark          |
| 5. euphony     | e. impermanence          |
| 6. euphoria    | f. feeling of well-being |
| 7. euthanasia  | g. stinginess            |
| 8. platitude   | h. poverty               |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–h, 3–a, 4–e, 5–c, 6–f, 7–b, 8–d

***

**Can you work with the words? (III)**

| 1. anodyne       | a. light, teasing banter               |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| 2. bromide       | b. tightfistedness                     |
| 3. persiflage    | c. statement intended to allay anxiety |
| 4. eulogy        | d. poverty, want                       |
| 5. penuriousness | e. high, formal praise                 |
| 6. indigence     | f. wealth                              |
| 7. affluence     | g. trite statement                     |

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–g, 3–a, 4–e, 5–b, 6–d, 7–f

***

**Can you work with the words? (IV)**

| 1. parsimonious | a. begin to vanish        |
| --------------- | ------------------------- |
|   2. destitute  | b. stingy, frugal         |
|   3. opulent    | c. highly praising        |
|   4. vicarious  | d. hackneyed phrase       |
|   5. euphonic   | e. ostentatiously wealthy |
|   6. eulogistic | f. stilted in expression  |
|   7. evanesce   | g. pleasant-sounding      |
|   8. eulogize   | h. in want                |
| 9. bromidic     | i. secondhand             |
| 10. cliché      | j. praise                 |

***

KEY:  1–b, 2–h, 3–e, 4–i, 5–g, 6–c, 7–a, 8–j, 9–f, 10–d

***

**Do you understand the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. Do _penurious_ people satisfy their extravagant desires?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Is _penuriousness_ the characteristic of a miser?

YES      NO

&#x20; 3\. If you are _parsimonious_ with praise, do you lavish it on others?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Are people with extremely low incomes forced to live a life of _parsimony?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Is _indigence_ a sign of wealth?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Are _indigent_ people often aided by state welfare?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. If you live in a state of _destitution_, do you have all the money you need?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is a completely _destitute_ person likely to have to live in want?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Does a person of _affluence_ generally have petty money worries?

YES      NO

10\. Are _opulent_ surroundings indicative of great wealth?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–no, 2–yes, 3–no, 4–yes, 5–no, 6–yes, 7–no, 8–yes, 9–no, 10–yes

***

**Do you understand the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. Can you engage in _vicarious_ exploits by reading spy novels?

YES      NO

&#x20; 2\. Does an _evanescent_ feeling remain for a considerable time?

YES      NO

3\. Do parents generally indulge in _euphemisms_ in front of young children?

YES      NO

&#x20; 4\. Is poetry generally _euphonious?_

YES      NO

&#x20; 5\. Does a sincere _eulogy_ indicate one’s feeling of admiration?

YES      NO

&#x20; 6\. Is _euphoria_ a feeling of malaise?

YES      NO

&#x20; 7\. Is _euthanasia_ practiced on animals?

YES      NO

&#x20; 8\. Is _persiflage_ an indication of seriousness?

YES      NO

&#x20; 9\. Does a liberal use of _clichés_ show original thinking?

YES      NO

10\. Is an _anodyne_ intended to relieve fears?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–yes, 4–yes, 5–yes, 6–no, 7–yes, 8–no, 9–no, 10–yes

***

**Do you understand the words? (III)**

1\. Is a _platitude_ flat and dull?

YES      NO

2\. If a person uses _bromides_, is he likely to be an interesting conversationalist?

YES      NO

3\. If you indulge in _persiflage_, are you being facetious?

YES      NO

4\. Are the works of Beethoven considered _euphonious?_

YES      NO

5\. Can parents receive a _vicarious_ thrill from their children’s triumphs?

YES      NO

***

KEY:  1–yes, 2–no, 3–yes, 4–yes, 5–yes

***

**Can you recall the words?**

&#x20; 1\. a statement, usually untrue, meant to alleviate fear

&#x20; 1\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. light banter

&#x20; 2\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. a hackneyed phrase

&#x20; 3\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. fleeting—lasting a very short time (_adj._)

&#x20; 4\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. laudatory—delivered in tones of formal praise (_adj._)

&#x20; 5\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. process of painlessly putting to death a victim of an incurable disease

&#x20; 6\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. stingy (_adj._)

&#x20; 7\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#x20; _or_ P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. in want (_adj._)

&#x20; 8\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. wealth

&#x20; 9\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. immense wealth

10\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. adverb describing the manner of responding empathetically to another’s acts

11\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. stinginess (_noun_)

12\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13–14. poverty

13\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14\. D\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

15\. impermanence

15\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

16\. pleasing sound

16\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

17\. substituting inoffensive words (_adj._)

17\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

18\. sense of well-being

18\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

19\. trite remark

19\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

20\. banal remark

20\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

21\. begin to vanish (v.)

21\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

22\. poverty-stricken (_adj._)

22\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

23–24. wealthy (two _adjs._)

23\. A\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

24\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

25\. feeling tiptop (_adj._)

25\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

26\. pleasant in sound (_adj._)

26\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\
&#xNAN;_&#x6F;r_ E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

27\. formal praise

27\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

28\. trite (_adj._)

28\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

29\. flat, dull (_adj._)

29\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

30\. to praise

30\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–anodyne, 2–persiflage, 3–cliché, 4–evanescent, 5–eulogistic, 6–euthanasia, 7–parsimonious _or_ penurious,8–destitute, 9–affluence, 10–opulence, 11–vicariously, 12–parsimony _or_ penuriousness, 13–indigence, 14–destitution, 15–evanescence, 16–euphony, 17–euphemistic, 18–euphoria, 19–bromide, 20–platitude, 21–evanesce, 22–indigent, 23–affluent, 24–opulent, 25–euphoric, 26–euphonic _or_ euphonious, 27–eulogy, 28–bromidic, 29–platitudinous, 30–eulogize

***

(_End of Session 40_)

### SESSION 41

#### ORIGINS AND RELATED WORDS

**1. people are the craziest animals**

_Bovine_, placid like a cow, stolid, patient, unexcitable, is built on the Latin word for _ox_ or _cow, bovis_, plus the suffix -_ine_, like, similar to, or characteristic of. To call someone _bovine_ is of course far from complimentary, for this adjective is considerably stronger than _phlegmatic_, and implies a certain mild contempt on the part of the speaker. A _bovine_ person is somewhat like a vegetable: eats and grows and lives, but apparently is lacking in any strong feelings.

Humans are sometimes compared to animals, as in the following adjectives:

1\. _leonine_ (LEE′-Ə-nīn′)—like a lion in appearance or temperament.

2\. _canine_ (KAY′-nīn′)—like a dog. As a noun, the word refers to the species to which dogs belong. Our _canine_ teeth are similar to those of a dog.

3\. _feline_ (FEE′-līn′)—catlike. We may speak of _feline_ grace; or (insultingly) of _feline_ temperament when we mean that a person is “catty.”

4\. _porcine_ (PAWR′-sīn′)—piglike.

5\. _vulpine_ (VUL′-pīn′)—foxlike in appearance or temperament. When applied to people, this adjective usually indicates the shrewdness of a fox.

6\. _ursine_ (UR′-sīn′)—bearlike.

7\. _lupine_ (L′-pīn)—wolflike.

8\. _equine_ (EE′-kwīn′)—horselike; “horsy.”

9\. _piscine_ (PIS′-īn′)—fishlike.

All these adjectives come from the corresponding Latin words for the animals; and, of course, each adjective also describes, or refers to, the specific animal as well as to the person likened to the animal.

|   1. _leo_    | lion  |
| ------------- | ----- |
|   2. _canis_  | dog   |
|   3. _felis_  | cat   |
|   4. _porcus_ | pig   |
|   5. _vulpus_ | fox   |
|   6. _ursus_  | bear  |
|   7. _lupus_  | wolf  |
|   8. _equus_  | horse |
|   9. _piscis_ | fish  |

The word for meat from a pig—_pork_—derives, obviously, from _porcus. Ursa Major_ and _Ursa Minor_, the _Great Bear_ and the _Little Bear_, the two conspicuous groups of stars in the northern sky (conspicuous, of course, only on a clear night), are so labeled because in formation they resemble the outlines of bears. The feminine name _Ursula_ is, by etymology, “a little bear,” which, perhaps, is a strange name to burden a child with. The skin disease _lupus_ was so named because it eats into the flesh, as a wolf might.

**2. you can’t go home again**

_Nostalgia_, built on two Greek roots, _nostos_, a return, and _algos_, pain (as in _neuralgia, cardialgia_, etc.), is a feeling you can’t everunderstand until you’ve experienced it—and you have probably experienced it whenever some external stimulus has crowded your mind with scenes from an earlier day.

You know how life often seems much pleasanter in retrospect? Your conscious memory tends to store up the pleasant experiences of the past (the trauma and unpleasant experiences may get buried in the unconscious), and when you are lonely or unhappy you may begin to relive these pleasant occurrences. It is then that you feel the emotional pain and longing that we call _nostalgia._

The adjective is _nostalgic_ (nos-TAL′-jik), as in “motion pictures that are _nostalgic_ of the fifties,” or as in, “He feels _nostalgic_ whenever he passes 138th Street and sees the house in which he grew up.”

**3. soundings**

_Cacophony_ is itself a harsh-sounding word—and is the only one that exactly describes the unmusical, grating, ear-offending noises you are likely to hear in man-made surroundings: the New York subway trains thundering through their tunnels (they are also, these days in the late 1970s, eye-offending, for which we might coin the term _cacopsis_, noun, and _cacoptic_, adjective), the traffic bedlam of rush hours in a big city, a steel mill, an automobile factory, a blast furnace, etc. Adjective: _cacophonous_ (kƏ-KOF′-Ə-nƏs).

These words are built on the Greek roots _kakos_, bad, harsh, or ugly, and _phone_, sound.

_Phone_, sound, is found also in:

1\. _telephone_—etymologically, “sound from afar”

2\. _euphony_—pleasant sound

3\. _phonograph_—etymologically, “writer of sound”

4\. _saxophone_—a musical instrument (hence _sound_) invented by Adolphe Sax

5\. _xylophone_—a musical instrument; etymologically, “sounds through wood” (Greek _xylon_, wood)

6\. _phonetics_ (fƏ-NET′-iks)—the science of the sounds of language; the adjective is _phonetic_ (fƏ-NET′-ik), the expert a _phonetician_ (fō′-nƏ-TISH′-Ən)

7\. _phonics_—the science of sound; also the method of teaching reading by drilling the sounds of letters and syllables

**4. the flesh and all**

_Carnivorous_ combines _carnis_, flesh, and _voro_, to devour. A _carnivorous_ animal, or _carnivore_ (KAHR′-nƏ-vawr′), is one whose main diet is meat.

_Voro_, to devour, is the origin of other words referring to eating habits:

1\. _herbivorous_ (hur-BIV′-Ər-Əs)—subsisting on grains, grasses, and other vegetation, as cows, deer, horses, etc. The animal is a _herbivore_ (HUR′-bƏ-vawr′). Derivation: Latin _herba_, herb, plus _voro_, to devour

2\. _omnivorous_ (om-NIV′-Ər-Əs)—eating everything: meat, grains, grasses, fish, insects, and anything else digestible. The only species so indiscriminate in their diet are humans and rats, plus, of course, some cats and dogs that live with people (in contrast to _felines_ and _canines_—lions, tigers, bobcats, wolves, etc.—that are not domesticated). _Omnivorous_ (combining Latin _omnis_, all, with _voro_, plus the adjective suffix -_ous_) refers not only to food. An _omnivorous_ reader reads everything in great quantities (that is, devours _all_ kinds of reading matter).

3\. _voracious_ (vaw-RAY′-shƏs)—_devouring;_ hence, greedy or gluttonous; may refer either to food or to any other habits. One may be a _voracious_ eater, _voracious_ reader, _voracious_ in one’s pursuit of money, pleasure, etc. Think of the two noun forms of _loquacious._ Can you write two nouns derived from _voracious?_ (1) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, (2) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**5. “allness”**

Latin _omnis_, all, is the origin of:

1\. _omnipotent_ (om-NIP′-Ə-tƏnt)—all-powerful, an adjective usually applied to God; also, to any ruler whose governing powers are unlimited, which allows for some exaggeration, as King Canute the Great proved to his sycophantic courtiers when he orderedthe tide to come so far up the beach and no further. He got soaking wet! (_Omnis_ plus Latin _potens, potentis_, powerful, as in _potentate_, a powerful ruler; _impotent_ (IM′-pƏ-tƏnt), powerless; _potent_, powerful; and _potential_, possessing power or ability not yet exercised). Can you write the noun form of _omnipotent?_

2\. _omniscient_ (om-NISH′-Ənt)—all-knowing: hence, infinitely wise. (_Omnis_ plus _sciens_, knowing.) We have discussed this adjective in a previous chapter, so you will have no problem writing the noun: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. _omnipresent_ (om′-nƏ-PREZ′-Ənt)—present in all places at once. Fear was _omnipresent_ in Europe during 1939 just before World War II. A synonym of _omnipresent_ is _ubiquitous_ (y-BIK′-wƏ-tƏs), from Latin _ubique_, everywhere. The _ubiquitous_ ice cream vendor seems to be _everywhere_ at the same time, tinkling those little bells, once spring arrives. The _ubiquitous_ little red wagon rides around _everywhere_ in airports to refuel departing planes. “_Ubiquitous_ laughter greeted the press secretary’s remark,” i.e., laughter was heard _everywhere_ in the room. The noun forms are _ubiquity_ (y-BIK′-wƏ-tee) or \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. (Can you think of the alternate form?)

4\. _omnibus_ (OM′-nƏ-bƏs)—etymologically, “for all, including all.” In the shortened form _bus_ we have a public vehicle for _all_ who can pay; in a John Galsworthy _omnibus_ we have a book containing _all_ of Galsworthy’s works; in an _omnibus_ legislative bill we have a bill containing _all_ the miscellaneous provisions and appropriations left out of other bills.

**6. more flesh**

Note how _carnis_, flesh, is the building block of:

1\. _carnelian_ (kahr-NEEL′-yƏn)—a reddish color, the color of red _flesh._

2\. _carnival_ (KAHR′-nƏ-vƏl)—originally the season of merrymaking just before Lent, when people took a last fling before saying _“Carne vale!”_ “Oh _flesh_, farewell!” (Latin _vale_, farewell, goodbye). Today a _carnival_ is a kind of outdoor entertainmentwith games, rides, side shows, and, of course, lots of food—also any exuberant or riotous merrymaking or festivities.

3\. _carnal_ (KAHR′-nƏl)—most often found in phrases like “_carnal_ pleasures” or “_carnal_ appetites,” and signifying pleasures or appetites of the _flesh_ rather than of the spirit—hence, sensual, lecherous, lascivious, lubricious, etc. The noun is _carnality_ (kahr-NAL′-Ə-tee).

4\. _carnage_ (KAHR′-nƏj)—great destruction of life (that is, of human _flesh_), as in war or mass murders.

5\. _reincarnation_ (ree′-in-kahr-NAY′-shƏn)—a rebirth or reappearance. Believers in _reincarnation_ maintain that one’s soul persists after it has fled the _flesh_, and eventually reappears in the body of a newborn infant or animal, or in another form. Some of us, according to this interesting philosophy, were once Napoleon, Alexander the Great, Cleopatra, etc. The verb is to _reincarnate_ (ree-in-KAHR′-nayt), to bring (a soul) back in another bodily form.

6\. _incarnate_ (in-KAHR′-nƏt)—in the _flesh._ If we use this adjective to call someone “the devil _incarnate_,” we mean that here is the devil in the _flesh._ Or we may say that someone is evil _incarnate_, that is, the personification of evil, evil invested with human or bodily form. The verb to _incarnate_ (in-KAHR′-nayt) is to embody, give bodily form to, or make real.

**7. dark secrets**

_Clandestine_ comes from Latin _clam_, secretly, and implies secrecy or concealment in the working out of a plan that is dangerous or illegal. _Clandestine_ is a close synonym of _surreptitious_ (sur′-Əp-TISH′-Əs), which means _stealthy, sneaky, furtive_, generally because of fear of detection.

The two words cannot always, however, be used interchangeably. We may speak of either _clandestine_ or _surreptitious_ meetings or arrangements; but usually only of _clandestine_ plans and only of _surreptitious_ movements or actions. Can you write the noun form of _surreptitious?_ \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

### REVIEW OF ETYMOLOGY <a href="#page427" id="page427"></a>

| PREFIX, ROOT, SUFFIX                     | MEANING                             |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
|   1. -_ine_                              | like, similar to, characteristic of |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   2. _leo_                               | lion                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   3. _felis_                             | cat                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   4. _porcus_                            | pig                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   5. _canis_                             | dog                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   6. _vulpus_                            | fox                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   7. _ursus_                             | bear                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   8. _lupus_                             | wolf                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
|   9. _equus_                             | horse                               |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 10. _piscis_                             | fish                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 11. _nostos_                             | a return                            |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 12. _algos_                              | pain                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 13. -_ic_                                | adjective suffix                    |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 14. _kakos_                              | bad, harsh, ugly                    |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 15. _phone_                              | sound                               |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 16. _xylon_                              | wood                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 17. _carnis_                             | flesh                               |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 18. _voro_                               | to devour                           |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 19. _herba_                              | herb                                |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 20. _omnis_                              | all                                 |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 21. -_ous_                               | adjective suffix                    |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 22. _potens, potentis_                   | powerful                            |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 23. _sciens_                             | knowing                             |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 24. _ubique_                             | everywhere                          |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 25. -_ity_                               | noun suffix                         |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 26. _vale_                               | farewell                            |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 27. -_al_                                | adjective suffix                    |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 28. _re_-                                | again, back                         |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 29. -_ate_                               | verb suffix                         |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 30. _in_-                                | in                                  |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 31. _clam_                               | secretly                            |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 32. -_ent_                               | adjective suffix                    |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |
| 33. -_ence_                              | noun suffix                         |
| ENGLISH WORD  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |                                     |

#### USING THE WORDS

**Can you pronounce the words? (I)**

|   1. _leonine_  | LEE′-Ə-nīn′  |
| --------------- | ------------ |
|   2. _canine_   | KAY′-nīn′    |
|   3. _feline_   | FEE′-līn′    |
|   4. _porcine_  | PAWR′-sīn′   |
|   5. _vulpine_  | VUL′-pīn′    |
|   6. _ursine_   | UR′-sīn′     |
|   7. _lupine_   | L′-pīn′      |
|   8. _equine_   | EE′-kwīn′    |
|   9. _piscine_  | PIS′-īn′     |
| 10. _nostalgic_ | nos-TAL′-jik |

**Can you pronounce the words? (II)**

|   1. _cacophonous_ | kƏ-KOF′-Ə-nƏs  |
| ------------------ | -------------- |
|   2. _phonetics_   | fƏ-NET′-iks    |
|   3. _phonetic_    | fƏ-NET′-ik     |
|   4. _phonetician_ | fō-nƏ-TISH′-Ən |
|   5. _carnivore_   | KAHR′-nƏ-vawr′ |
|   6. _herbivore_   | HUR′-bƏ-vawr′  |
|   7. _herbivorous_ | hur-BIV′-Ər-Əs |
|   8. _omnivorous_  | om-NIV′-Ər-Əs  |
|   9. _voracious_   | vaw-RAY′-shƏs  |
| 10. _voracity_     | vaw-RAS′-Ə-tee |
| 11. _omnipotent_   | om-NIP′-Ə-tƏnt |
| 12. _impotent_     | IM′-pƏ-tƏnt    |
| 13. _impotence_    | IM′-pƏ-tƏns    |
| 14. _omnipotence_  | om-NIP′-Ə-tƏns |

**Can you pronounce the words? (III)**

| 1. _omniscient_     | om-NISH′-Ənt      |
| ------------------- | ----------------- |
| 2. _omniscience_    | om-NISH′-Əns      |
| 3. _omnipresent_    | om′-nƏ-PREZ′-Ənt  |
| 4. _omnipresence_   | om′-nƏ-PREZ′-Əns  |
| 5. _ubiquitous_     | y-BIK′-wƏ-tƏs     |
| 6. _ubiquity_       | y-BIK′-wƏ-tee     |
| 7. _ubiquitousness_ | y-BIK′-wƏ-tƏs-nƏs |
| 8. _omnibus_        | OM′-nƏ-bƏs        |

**Can you pronounce the words? (IV)**

|   1. _carnelian_          | kahr-NEEL′-yƏn         |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------- |
|   2. _carnal_             | KAHR′-nƏl              |
|   3. _carnality_          | kahr-NAL′-Ə-tee        |
|   4. _carnage_            | KAHR′-nƏj              |
|   5. _reincarnation_      | ree′-in-kahr-NAY′-shƏn |
|   6. _reincarnate_ (v.)   | ree′-in-KAHR′-nayt     |
|   7. _incarnate_ (_adj._) | in-KAHR′-nƏt           |
|   8. _incarnate_ (_v._)   | in-KAHR′-nayt          |
|   9. _surreptitious_      | sur′-Əp-TISH′-Əs       |
| 10. _surreptitiousness_   | sur′-Əp-TISH′-Əs-nƏs   |

**Can you work with the words? (I)**

| 1. leonine        | a. doglike               |
| ----------------- | ------------------------ |
|   2. canine       | b. greedy, devouring     |
|   3. feline       | c. foxlike               |
|   4. porcine      | d. all-powerful          |
|   5. vulpine      | e. stealthy, clandestine |
|   6. ursine       | f. lionlike              |
|   7. voracious    | g. all-knowing           |
|   8. omnipotent   | h. bearlike              |
|   9. omniscient   | i. catlike               |
| 10. surreptitious | j. piglike               |

***

KEY:  1–f, 2–a, 3–i, 4–j, 5–c, 6–h, 7–b, 8–d, 9–g, 10–e

***

**Can you work with the words? (II)**

| 1. nostalgic   | a. harsh-sounding              |
| -------------- | ------------------------------ |
| 2. cacophonous | b. eating everything           |
| 3. herbivorous | c. lewd, lecherous, lubricious |
| 4. omnivorous  | d. found everywhere            |
| 5. ubiquitous  | e. homesick                    |
| 6. carnal      | f. grass-eating                |
| 7. incarnate   | g. in the flesh                |

***

KEY:  1–e, 2–a, 3–f, 4–b, 5–d, 6–c, 7–g

***

**Can you work with the words? (III)**

| 1. phonetics          | a. universality                           |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
|   2. carnivore        | b. a color                                |
|   3. voracity         | c. infinite power                         |
|   4. omnipotence      | d. furtiveness; stealth; sneakiness       |
|   5. omniscience      | e. lechery, lasciviousness, lubricity     |
|   6. omnipresence     | f. infinite wisdom                        |
|   7. omnibus          | g. science of speech sounds               |
|   8. carnelian        | h. slaughter                              |
|   9. carnality        | i. a collection of all things             |
| 10. carnage           | j. greediness                             |
| 11. surreptitiousness | k. meat-eater                             |
| 12. reincarnation     | 1. a return to life in a new body or form |

***

KEY:  1–g, 2–k, 3–j, 4–c, 5–f, 6–a, 7–i, 8–b, 9–e, 10–h, 11–d, 12–l

***

**Can you work with the words? (IV)**

| 1. lupine           | a. fishlike                                |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| 2. equine           | b. powerless                               |
| 3. piscine          | c. wolflike                                |
| 4. phonetician      | d. bring back into a new body or form      |
| 5. impotent         | e. occurrence, or existence, everywhere    |
| 6. ubiquity         | f. horselike                               |
| 7. reincarnate (v.) | g. expert in speech sounds                 |
| 8. incarnate (v.)   | h. embody; make real; put into bodily form |

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–f, 3–a, 4–g, 5–b, 6–e, 7–d, 8–h

***

**Do you understand the words? (I)**

&#x20; 1\. A person of _leonine_ appearance looks like a tiger.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 2\. _Canine_ habits refers to the habits of dogs.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. _Feline_ grace means catlike grace.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. _Porcine_ appearance means wolflike appearance.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. _Vulpine_ craftiness means foxlike craftiness.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. _Ursine_ means bearlike.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. _Nostalgic_ feelings refer to a longing for past experiences.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 8\. _Cacophonous_ music is pleasant and sweet.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 9\. An elephant is a _carnivore._

TRUE      FALSE

10\. Deer are _herbivorous._

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–T, 3–T, 4–F, 5–T, 6–T, 7–T, 8–F, 9–F, 10–T

***

**Do you understand the words? (II)**

&#x20; 1\. An _omnivorous_ reader does very little reading.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 2\. A _voracious_ eater is gluttonous.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 3\. True _omnipotence_ is unattainable by human beings.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 4\. No one is _omniscient._

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 5\. Fear of economic ruin was practically _omnipresent_ in the early nineteen-thirties.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 6\. When an airplane lands for refueling, the _ubiquitous_ little red gasoline wagon comes rolling up.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 7\. An author’s _omnibus_ contains all his published writings.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 8\. _Carnelian_ is a deep blue color.

TRUE      FALSE

&#x20; 9\. _Carnality_ is much respected in a puritanical society.

TRUE      FALSE

10\. There is considerable _carnage_ in war.

TRUE      FALSE

11\. A _surreptitious_ glance is meant to be conspicuous.

TRUE      FALSE

12\. A person who is evil _incarnate_ is a vicious character.

TRUE      FALSE

***

KEY:  1–F, 2–T, 3–T, 4–T, 5–T, 6–T, 7–T, 8–F, 9–F, 10–T, 11–F, 12–T

***

**Can you recall the words?**

**I—adverbs**

1–2. secretly (two forms)

1\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. in a harsh and noisy manner

3\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. in a homesick manner

4\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. in a greedy, devouring manner

5\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–clandestinely, 2–surreptitiously, 3–cacophonously, 4–nostalgically, 5–voraciously

***

**II—nouns**

&#x20; 1\. greediness

&#x20; 1\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. unlimited power

&#x20; 2\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. infinite knowledge

&#x20; 3\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. a gathering of all things

&#x20; 4\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. lechery; indulgence in fleshly pleasures

&#x20; 5\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. slaughter

&#x20; 6\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. stealthiness; secretiveness

&#x20; 7\. S\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. harsh sound

&#x20; 8\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. science of speech sounds

&#x20; 9\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. a return to life in new form

10\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–voracity, 2–omnipotence, 3–omniscience, 4–omnibus, 5–carnality, 6–carnage, 7–surreptitiousness, 8–cacophony, 9–phonetics, 10–reincarnation

***

**III—adjectives**

&#x20; 1\. lionlike

&#x20; 1\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. doglike

&#x20; 2\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. catlike

&#x20; 3\. F\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. cowlike

&#x20; 4\. B\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. foxlike

&#x20; 5\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. bearlike

&#x20; 6\. U\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7\. homesick

&#x20; 7\. N\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. grating in sound

&#x20; 8\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. meat-eating

&#x20; 9\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. grass-eating

10\. H\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

11\. all-eating; indiscriminate

11\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

12\. devouring; greedy

12\. V\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

13\. in the flesh

13\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–leonine, 2–canine, 3–feline, 4–bovine, 5–vulpine, 6–ursine, 7–nostalgic, 8–cacophonous, 9–carnivorous, 10–herbivorous, 11–omnivorous, 12–voracious, 13–incarnate

***

**IV. more adjectives**

1\. all-powerful

1\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2\. all-knowing

2\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3\. present or existing everywhere

3\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

4\. found everywhere

4\. U\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

5\. lewd, lascivious, lecherous

5\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

6\. secret

6\. C\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–omnipotent, 2–omniscient, 3–omnipresent, 4–ubiquitous, 5–carnal, 6–clandestine

***

**V. final mop-up**

&#x20; 1\. wolflike

&#x20; 1\. L\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 2\. horselike

&#x20; 2\. E\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 3\. fishlike

&#x20; 3\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 4\. referring to speech sounds

&#x20; 4\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 5\. expert in speech sounds

&#x20; 5\. P\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 6\. powerless

&#x20; 6\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 7–8. existence everywhere

&#x20; 7\. U\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; _or_ U\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 8\. O\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

&#x20; 9\. to bring back into another body or form

&#x20; 9\. R\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

10\. to embody, make real, or put into bodily form

10\. I\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

***

KEY:  1–lupine, 2–equine, 3–piscine, 4–phonetic, 5–phonetician, 6–impotent, 7–ubiquity _or_ ubiquitousness, 8–omnipresence, 9–reincarnate, 10–incarnate

***

#### CHAPTER REVIEW

**A. Do you recognize the words?**

&#x20; 1\. Utter want:

(a) affluence, (b) opulence, (c) penury

&#x20; 2\. Experienced secondhand:

(a) ephemeral, (b) vicarious, (c) evanescent

&#x20; 3\. Inoffensive circumlocution:

(a) badinage, (b) persiflage, (c) euphemism

&#x20; 4\. Homesick:

(a) nostalgic, (b) bromide, (c) clandestine

&#x20; 5\. Meat-eating:

(a) herbivorous, (b) voracious, (c) carnivorous

&#x20; 6\. Stingy:

(a) indigent, (b) parsimonious, (c) opulent

&#x20; 7\. Extreme financial need:

(a) destitution, (b) affluence, (c) parsimony

&#x20; 8\. Great and increasing wealth:

(a) penuriousness, (b) affluence, (c) omnipresence

&#x20; 9\. Remaining for a short time:

(a) euphemistic, (b) evanescent, (c) eulogistic

10\. Sweet-sounding:

(a) euphonious, (b) cacophonous, (c) euphoric

11\. Praise glowingly:

(a) evanesce, (b) eulogize, (c) reincarnate

12\. Sense of physical well-being:

(a) euthanasia, (b) euphoria, (c) persiflage

13\. Hackneyed expression:

(a) anodyne, (b) badinage, (c) cliché

14\. catlike:

(a) leonine, (b) feline, (c) canine

15\. Bearlike:

(a) vulpine, (b) ursine, (c) porcine

16\. All-knowing:

(a) omnipotent, (b) omniscient, (c) omnipresent

17\. Found everywhere:

(a) ubiquitous, (b) omnivorous, (c) omnibus

18\. Destruction:

(a) carnage, (b) carnality, (c) reincarnation

19\. Stealthy:

(a) voracious, (b) surreptitious, (c) incarnate

***

KEY:  1–c, 2–b, 3–c, 4–a, 5–c, 6–b, 7–a, 8–b, 9–b, 10–a, 11–b, 12–b, 13–c, 14–b, 15–b, 16–b, 17–a, 18–a, 19–b

***

**B. Can you recognize roots?**

| MEANING                       | ROOT                               |
| ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
|   1. _penuria_                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   penury              |                                    |
|   2. _fluo_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   affluent            |                                    |
|   3. _opulentus_              | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   opulent             |                                    |
|   4. _ephemera_               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   ephemeral           |                                    |
|   5. _vanesco_                | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   evanescent          |                                    |
|   6. _pheme_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   euphemism           |                                    |
|   7. _phone_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   phonetics           |                                    |
|   8. _logos_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   eulogy              |                                    |
|   9. _thanatos_               | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   euthanasia          |                                    |
| 10. _platys_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   platitude, platypus |                                    |
| 11. _odyne_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   anodyne             |                                    |
| 12. _leo_                     | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   leonine             |                                    |
| 13. _felis_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   feline              |                                    |
| 14. _porcus_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   porcine             |                                    |
| 15. _canis_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   canine              |                                    |
| 16. _vulpus_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   vulpine             |                                    |
| 17. _lupus_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   lupine              |                                    |
| 18. _equus_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   equine              |                                    |
| 19. _piscis_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   piscine             |                                    |
| 20. _nostos_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   nostalgia           |                                    |
| 21. _algos_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   nostalgic           |                                    |
| 22. _kakos_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   cacophonous         |                                    |
| 23. _xylon_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   xylophone           |                                    |
| 24. _carnis_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   carnivorous         |                                    |
| 25. _voro_                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   omnivorous          |                                    |
| 26. _herba_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   herbivorous         |                                    |
| 27. _omnis_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   omnipotent          |                                    |
| 28. _potens, potentis_        | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   impotent            |                                    |
| 29. _sciens_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   omniscience         |                                    |
| 30. _ubique_                  | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   ubiquitous          |                                    |
| 31. _vale!_                   | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   carnival            |                                    |
| 32. _clam_                    | \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| EXAMPLE   clandestine         |                                    |

***

KEY:  1–want, neediness, 2–to flow, 3–wealthy, 4–dayfly, 5–to vanish, 6–voice, 7–sound, 8–word, speech, 9–death, 10–flat, broad, 11–pain, 12–lion, 13–cat, 14–pig, 15–dog, 16–fox, 17–wolf, 18–horse, 19–fish, 20–a return, 21–pain, 22–bad, harsh, ugly, 23–wood, 24–flesh, 25–to devour, 26–herb, 27–all, 28–powerful, 29–knowing, 30–everywhere, 31–farewell!, 32–secretly

***

#### TEASER QUESTIONS FOR THE AMATEUR ETYMOLOGIST

1\. American poet William Cullen Bryant wrote a poem in 1811 called _Thanatopsis._ You are familiar with both roots in the word. Can you figure out the meaning? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

2\. If you wanted to coin a word for the study or science of death and dying, what would you come up with? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

3\. _Pheme_, as you know from _euphemism_, means _voice._ This root derives from a Greek verb _phanai_, to speak, which, as it traveledthrough Latin, Old French, and Middle English, finally took on the spelling _phet-, phec_-, or _phes_-. And you recall that the Greek prefix _pro_- means _beforehand_ or _ahead_ (as in _prognosis, prologue_, etc.). Can you now combine elements to form a word meaning:

(a) to say beforehand; to foretell (an occurrence before it actually happens)? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(b) the foretelling of such an occurrence? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(c) the person who foretells?\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

4\. Can you combine a _Latin_ prefix and root to form words of the same meaning?

(a) to foretell: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(b) the act of foretelling: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

5\. An eminent psychoanalyst, Richard Karpe of Connecticut, has coined the term _nostopathy_ (nos-TOP′-Ə-thee) for an emotional disorder he diagnosed among a number of his patients who were returning veterans of World War II and of the Korean and Vietnam wars. You know both roots in the word. Can you figure out the meaning? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

6\. Coin a word that means:

(a) the killing of foxes: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(b) the killing of wolves: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(c) the killing of lions, tigers, and other cats: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(d) the killing of bears: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

7\. Figure out an adjective that means:

(a) fish-eating: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(b) insect-eating: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

8\. Have you ever wondered whether the Canary Islands were named after the Latin root _canis_, dog? They were. Large, wild dogs inhabited the area. Pretty songbirds also abounded there. What were these birds called? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

9\. A new verb was coined some years ago, based on the Latin root _potens, potentis_, meaning (of a drug) _to make more effectiveor powerful; to augment the effect of another drug._ Can you figure out what this verb would be? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

(_Answers in Chapter 18_)

#### GETTING USED TO NEW WORDS

Reference has been made, in previous chapters, to the intimate relationship between reading and vocabulary building. Good books and the better magazines will not only acquaint you with a host of new ideas (and, therefore, new words, since every word is the verbalization of an idea), but also will help you gain a more complete and a richer understanding of the hundreds of words you are learning through your work in this book. If you have been doing a sufficient amount of stimulating reading—and that means, at minimum, several magazines a week and at least three books of non-fiction a month—you have been meeting, constantly, over and over again, the new words you have been learning in these pages. Every such encounter is like seeing an old friend in a new place. You know how much better you understand your friends when you have a chance to see them react to new situations; similarly, you will gain a much deeper understanding of the friends you have been making among words as you see them in different contexts and in different places.

My recommendations in the past have been of non-fiction titles, but novels too are a rich source of additions to your vocabulary—provided you stay alert to the new words you will inevitably meet in reading novels.

The natural temptation, when you encounter a brand-new word in a novel, is to ignore it—the lines of the plot are perfectly clear even if many of the author’s words are not.

I want to counsel strongly that you resist the temptation to ignore the unfamiliar words you may meet in your novel reading: resist it with every ounce of your energy, for only by such resistance can you keep building your vocabulary as you read.

What should you do? Don’t rush to a dictionary, don’t bother underlining the word, don’t keep long lists of words that you will eventually look up _en masse_—these activities are likely to becomepainful and you will not continue them for any great length of time.

Instead, do something quite simple—and very effective.

When you meet a new word, underline it with a _mental_ pencil. That is, pause for a second and attempt to figure out its meaning from its use in the sentence or from its etymological root or prefix, if it contains one you have studied. Make a mental note of it, say it aloud once or twice—and then go on reading.

That’s all there is to it. What you are doing, of course, is developing the same type of mind-set toward the new word that you have developed toward the words you have studied in this book. And the results, of course, will be the same—you will begin to notice the word occurring again and again in other reading you do, and finally, having seen it in a number of varying contexts, you will begin to get enough of its connotation and flavor to come to a fairly accurate understanding of its meaning. In this way you will be developing alertness not only to the words you have studied in this book, but to all expressive and meaningful words. And your vocabulary will keep growing.

_But of course that will happen only if you keep reading._

I do not wish to recommend any particular novels or novelists, since the type of fiction one enjoys is a very personal matter. You doubtless know the kind of story you like—mystery, science fiction, spy, adventure, historical, political, romantic, Western, biographical, one or all of the above. Or you may be entranced by novels of ideas, of sexual prowess, of fantasy, of life in different segments of society from your own. No matter. Find the kind of novel or novelist _you_ enjoy by browsing in the public library or among the thousands of titles in bookstores that have a rich assortment of paperbacks as well as hardbacks.

And then read! And keep on the alert for new words! You will find them by the hundreds and thousands. Bear in mind: _people with rich vocabularies have been reading omnivorously, voraciously, since childhood_—including the ingredients listed in small print on bread wrappers and cereal boxes.

(_End of Session 41_)

***

<sup>1</sup> Remember Ogden Nash’s delightful definition?

&#x20;              The cow is of the bovine ilk,

&#x20;              One end moo, the other end milk.

<sup>2</sup> Latest figures, 1978, for the United States: males, 68.5 years; females, 76.4 years.
